Accelerat ing t he world's research.

A taxonomy for the evaluation of
mobile museum guides
Areti Damala, Hub Kockelkorn
Proceedings of the 8th conference on …

Cite this paper

Downloaded from Academia.edu 

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of t he best relat ed papers 

Nomadic comput ing in indoor cult ural set t ings: Int elligent connect ivit y, cont ext awareness a…
Aret i Damala, Marc Brelot
Merging augment ed realit y based feat ures in mobile mult imedia museum guides
Aret i Damala
Bridging t he gap bet ween t he digit al and t he physical: design and evaluat ion of a mobile augment ed re…
Aret i Damala

A Taxonomy for the Evaluation of Mobile Museum Guides
Areti Damala

Hub Kockelkorn

France Telecom R&D
4, rue du Clos Courtel
35512, Cesson Sevigne, France
++33-2-99-1248143

Museon Museum
Stadhouderslaan 37
2517 HV, The Hague, Netherlands
++31-70-3381338

areti.damala@orange-ft.com

hkockelkorn@museon.nl

ABSTRACT
Museums are a fertile ground for experimentations with
edutainment applications conceived for mobile devices. However
the design, implementation and maintenance of mobile
multimedia guides is a time and resources consuming iterative
process to which ideally all involved stakeholders should
participate. Evaluation therefore is of outmost importance.
Drawing from already published results and on site experience
from DANAE project we define three categories of evaluation key
points, under which all possible evaluation questions measuring
the effectiveness of an edutainment application can be classified;
we then match them with all involved stakeholders, mainly
museums, their visitors and information technologies companies.
Finally, we argue that the proposed taxonomy can be used for the
classification of different evaluation questions so as to constitute a
comprehensive and adjustable guide for evaluation purposes of
applications for different and heterogeneous museum
environments.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2
[Information
interfaces
and
presentation]: User Interfaces - ergonomics,
evaluation, methodology, theory and methods,
user
centred
design.
J.5
[Arts
and
Humanities]: Fine Arts. K.3.1 [Computer and
Education]:
Computers
in
education
collaborative
learning,
Computer-assisted
instruction.

General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Human Factors.

Keywords
Museum handheld devices, evaluation, experimentation,
geolocalization, multimedia applications, edutainment, mobility.

1. INTRODUCTION
Museums constitute an ideal environment for experimentation
with mobile, interactive applications dedicated to the
interpretation of tangible and intangible cultural heritage as they
are –by definition- “permanent institutions in the service of
society and of its development, open to the public, which acquire,
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).
MobileHCI'06, September 12-15, 2006, Helsinki, Finland.
ACM 1-59593-390-5/06/0009.

conserve, research, communicate and exhibit, for purposes of
study, education, enjoyment, the tangible and intangible evidence
of people and their environment" (ICOM 2001 definition) and
where learning has always been a “mobile” experience conducted
usually not individually but with other companions. More
recently, the increasing need for museums to become financially
self sustained has opened up new perspectives for a long lasting
relationship (before, during and after the visit) in between
museums and its audiences.
The use of handheld devices in the museum setting can be
examined under two perspectives. First, they make part of
interpretation methods employed to convey the meaning and
facilitate the contextualisation of an exposed object. Secondly,
mobile guides can be considered as making part of other
multimedia and information technologies applied in the museum
setting for purposes that vary from cataloguing, ticketing and
administration, to knowledge dissemination, publication and on
site interpretation.

2. EVALUATION OF MOBILE GUIDES IN
THE MUSEUM SETTING
One of the most important aspects of the introduction of mobile
guides in the museum setting is that due to their character they
could be used as a linking entity for the delivery of all kind of
information delivered through more traditional means, such as
explanatory textual labels, posters, educational programs, audio
guides, guided tours, printed material or stationary multimedia
applications. However, there are still issues that constitute barriers
for the adoption of mobile cutting-edge technology in the museum
premises[1]. The cost is sometimes prohibiting, additional
personnel can be required for the distribution while museum
curators sometimes fear for a heads down approach [2] in an
environment where the museum display is considered to be the
major form of pedagogy. These are some of the reasons why
evaluation should be introduced from the beginning of a project.
Several evaluation studies have been conducted during the last
years. They all share a common characteristic: measuring the
effectiveness of the introduction of handheld devices in the
museum setting. Evaluation questions are sometimes mentioned
as well as more or less measurable aspects of this intervention.
Some of the most common ones are enjoyability, usefulness, ease
of use, ergonomics, user satisfaction, navigation, interface,
content design, geolocalization, knowledge acquisition,
fragmentation of attention and isolation, attentional balance and
social interaction.

In order to better conduct our experimentations in DANAE
project, we proceeded in a comparative study of numerous
evaluation results conducted in the last five years and tried to
classify evaluation questions with the aforementioned different
evaluation aspects in order to better define which are the key
evaluation points that should be taken under consideration in the
process of the assessment of a mobile, location aware, multimedia
museum guide. This classification yielded two conclusions. The
first one is that evaluation key points can fall under three
categories: technological evaluation points, information impact
evaluation points and logistics/administration evaluation points.
The second one is that further classification can be obtained if one
matches particular key points with different stakeholders namely
museums and information technology companies and museum
visitors.

3. KEY EVALUATION POINTS FOR
MOBILE MUSEUM GUIDES
3.1
Technological Evaluation Key Points
Technological evaluation points are related with choices made
regarding the actual software and hardware used to design and
implement multimedia applications for museum handheld guides.
In this case, evaluation with museum stuff should include
evaluation questions relevant with the content implementation, the
effectiveness of the chosen way of content distribution (either
wireless or locally stored), the geolocalization modules, in case
they exist to help with visitors’ orientation and, finally, the
content delivery and adaptation to potentially different platforms
and available bandwidths. Technological evaluation points must
also be assessed with museum visitors. Under this category we
classified issues such as the usability and ease of use of a
proposed application, the overall user interface, including
navigation, multimedia and interaction design, the recovery of the
system after a potential crash, ergonomics (such as the use of
stripes or headphones), the positioning and messaging system and
the system’s accessibility. Personalization, according to language,
age, different learning abilities, preferred themes, available time
for the visit, falls also under this category.

3.2
Information Impact Evaluation Key
Points
Information Impact evaluation points are relevant with the impact
of introducing a mobile multimedia guide in the museum setting.
These two can also be examined under two different perspectives,
the museum’s point of view and the visitors’ point of view. This
category is strongly linked with the previous one. For example the
choice of specific tools for the content implementation influences
the process of content creation and updating as well the process
for the creation of different user groups and profiles.
Information Impact evaluation points are more numerous when
examining the visitors’ side. Here, one of the main evaluation
points is the content quality. Content quality can be treated either
as such, meaning the quality of the multimedia content included
as well as its overall structure and design as well as in relation
with the actual exhibition that is accompanied and interpreted
with the multimedia guide.
Other important aspects that are often treated in assessment
sessions have to do with the usability, enjoyability and usefulness
of the application as well as with the overall user satisfaction

Distraction and attentional balance as described by Aoki [3] et al.
falls under this category as well as learning and knowledge
acquisition and isolation in contrast with the issue of social
interaction and general interaction impact.

3.3

Administration Evaluation Key Points

There is finally a third category, which groups evaluation points
relevant with administration/logistics issues. Regarding the
museum professionals, evaluation needs to be conducted in
relation to maintainability. Maintainability covers many different
aspects such as battery life and recharging, updating older
versions of the multimedia applications, security not only of the
devices but of the overall museum information system, as well as
distribution and recovery of the terminals after the end of each
session. An important issue is to examine whether the number of
existing terminals is sufficient as well as the personnel charged
with the distribution and recovery of the devices. Distribution and
registration process needs also to be evaluated with visitors in
order to see if the full process of getting and using a mobile
device is smooth and not time and energy consuming.

4. CONCLUSIONS
Even though more and more museums throughout the world have
started experimenting with mobile, location aware and multimedia
capable devices there is still skepticism as to which extent
applications conceived for portable, able to be personalized
devices are effective with regards to the mission, the policies and
the available funds in a museum setting. Therefore evaluation and
assessment is of great importance. In this paper we argued that
even thought several evaluation studies regarding the
effectiveness of museum handheld devices have been published,
there is still no unanimity in what the term effective means. This
study suggests that effectiveness can be examined using three
different kinds of evaluation key points, related with the
technology chosen, the information impact of the proposed
application as well as with logistics/ administration issues. We
believe that this categorization and formalization of
heterogeneous evaluation points could be further developed by
matching evaluation key points with all kind of possible
evaluation questions present in other studies so as to form an
easily adjustable and comprehensive guide able to be used for the
assessment, modification and evaluation of various aspects of
mobile, location aware, multimedia guides for the museum
setting.

5. REFERENCES
[1]

M. Brelot, A. Cotarmanach, A. Damala, and H.
Kockelcorn, "Nomadic computing in indoor cultural
settings: Intelligent connectivity, context awareness and
the mobile museum experience," presented at ICHIM
2005, Paris 21-23 September 2005, CD-ROM
proceedings

[2]

D. von Lehn and C. Heath, "Displacing the object: Mobile
Technologies and Interpretive Resources," presented at
ICHIM2003, Paris, 8-12 September 2003, CD-ROM
proceedings.

[3]

M. Aoki, A. Woodruff, A. Hurst, and M. H. Szymanski,
"Electronic Guidebooks and visitor attention," presented
at ICHIM 2001, Milan, Italy, 2001.

