See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228719619

ARCHIE: Disclosing a Museum by a Socially-aware Mobile Guide
Article · January 2006

CITATIONS

READS

17

176

6 authors, including:
Kris Gabriëls
Hasselt University
10 PUBLICATIONS 66 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Kris Gabriëls on 14 July 2015.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

The 7th International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage
VAST (2006)
M. Ioannides, D. Arnold, F. Niccolucci, K. Mania (Editors)

ARCHIE: Disclosing a Museum by a Socially-aware Mobile
Guide
Kris Luyten1 , Heleen Van Loon1 , Daniël Teunkens1 , Kris Gabriëls1 , Karin Coninx1 and Elke Manshoven2
1

Hasselt University – transnationale Universiteit Limburg
Expertise Centre for Digital Media
Wetenschapspark 2, 3590 Diepenbeek, Belgium
{kris.luyten, heleen.vanloon,daniel.teunkens,kris.gabriels,karin.coninx}@uhasselt.be
2 Provincial Gallo-Roman Museum
Provincie Limburg
Kielenstraat 15, 3700 Tongeren, Belgium
emanshoven@limburg.be

Abstract
We present ARCHIE, a research project which aims to discover how handheld guides can be used as powerful
instruments to enhance the visitor’s learning experience. Although mobile devices are becoming a common aid
to support a museum visit, they often lead to an individualized experience. However, most people do not visit a
museum alone, and recent research has pointed out that social interaction is a prerequisite for an intensified and
improved learning process. To accommodate the shortcomings in many of the current solutions, we are designing
a platform that enables us to create a socially-aware handheld guide that stimulates interaction between group
members. They can communicate with each other either directly (by voice) or indirectly (by collaborative games)
by means of their mobile guides.
Besides the aforementioned communication possibilities, handheld guides can also provide a way to present personalized content. By using a personal profile, it is possible to adapt the interface and tailor the information to the
needs and interests of every visitor.
The combination of personalized content and interfaces, communication channels between visitors in the same
group and support for localization might lead to an innovative mobile guide that integrates with the museum
as well as with other visitors. Our platform enables social, and, in many cases, playful interactions with other
visitors in the same group. At the same time the context-awareness (proximity and personalization) increases the
involvement of the visitor with the content presented in the museum.

1. Introduction
In this paper we describe ARCHIE, an interdisciplinary
research project of the Expertise Centre for Digital Media (Hasselt University) and the Gallo-Roman Museum
(Province of Limburg). This museum is located in Tongeren,
Belgium’s oldest city, and tells the story of the region from
prehistory up to and including the Merovingian period. The
museum’s visitor approach focusing on temporary exhibitions, exploring fascinating themes and a professionally-run
educational programme has proved very successful. Annual
visitor numbers rocketed from 20.000 to 150.000 in just ten
years. The restrictions of the existing museum building and
c The Eurographics Association 2006.

new trends in museum presentation explain the extensive expansion project of the museum. The new museum is due to
open its doors in 2008.

As part of this expansion, the Gallo-Roman museum has
rephrased its mission and aims. The main objective became
to create an optimal learning experience for different visitor groups. The museum wants to provide information in the
future exhibition in such a way, that any person can make
his visit a personally meaningful one. Furthermore, the museum wants to develop a tool to encourage and steer social
learning. Families are a good example of a group where so-

K. Luyten et al. / ARCHIE: Disclosing a Museum by a Socially-aware Mobile Guide

cial learning takes place: a mix of different age groups with
different interests can share their interests and opinions.
The current trend to introduce PDA-based mobile guides
to enrich the visiting experience of a museum [PT03, Fis05,
Exp05], has led us to investigate how such guides can support the social processes that are fundamental for learning
in a museum. The challenge in the ARCHIE project is the
combination of a personalized mobile guide that is still part
of a group of cooperating guides. While information can be
tailored to the needs and interests of individuals in a group,
there has to be a way for these individuals to interact with
each other and exchange knowledge and interpretations during the visit.
The development of our ARCHIE Mobile Guide System
is done by an interdisciplinary team. The team consists out
of people with different backgrounds: historians, educationalists, computer scientists and graphic designers. The content of what is presented on the mobile guide is defined with
great care and in close collaboration with the museum team.
In this paper we give an overview of the Mobile Guide
System that supports the key missions of the museum such as
social learning and personalization. Section 2 delves deeper
into the context in which we developed the mobile guide:
section 2.1 identifies the expectations of the (potential) museum visitors, section 2.2 shows the importance of social interaction and section 2.3 concludes with our objectives. The
objectives are translated into a concrete mobile guide in section 3, where we focus on group communication (section
3.1), personalization (section 3.2) and location-awareness
(section 3.3). We conclude the paper with a framework
overview in section 4 that shows how the different parts are
integrated in one complete system and make some conclusions.
2. Defining the context
2.1. Know your visitors
In order to accomplish the realization of the new objective,
the Gallo-Roman Museum needed to get better acquainted
with its public. For this reason the museum conducted an
extensive investigation among visitors and potential visitors,
to find out what prompted them to visit the museum, what
their interests are, and in which way they would want to learn
about the museum collection [PGR05].
Concerning visit expectations, 61% of the (potential) visitors indicate they want to learn something, look at/admire
objects (53%) and experience something, relax (33%). Questions about visit behaviour reveal they also prefer a social
museum visit: 56 % wants to talk to family or friends about
what there is to see. These results correlate with recent studies about visit motivations; Falk and Dierking argue in their
leading reference work Learning from museums [FD00] that
“dozens of studies document that the primary reason most

people attend museums, whether for themselves or for their
children, is in order to learn”. The second most cited motivation is entertainment: most visitors mention they go to
museums in their free time to have fun and/or to see new
interesting things in a relaxing and aesthetically pleasing
environment. Museum-going is also commonly viewed as
a social event. Visiting a museum is widely perceived as a
’day out’ for the whole family, a special social experience,
a chance for family members or friends to enjoy themselves
separately and together.
2.2. The importance of social interaction
Starting from a social-constructivist approach, Falk and
Dierking came to emphasize the role of the social group
in the way visitors construct meaning in their contextual
model of learning. In this model, three overlapping contexts contribute to and influence the consequent learning and
meaning-making: the personal context (visitor profile and
learning style), the physical context (museum environment)
and the socio-cultural context (social interaction).
Following this model, social interaction does not only promote, but is a prerequisite for intellectual, social, personal
and cultural development [Mor02]. Recent studies with children also recognize the important role of social interaction: “the potential of the learning environment and its objects largely depends on the social atmosphere generated
and the support young children receive through positive, reciprocal interactions. [. . . ] The successful learning setting
functions as a community of learners, where all individuals are respected, their learning is supported, and opportunities for collaboration are provided.” [PW02] However, the
social aspect of a museum visit is often neglected, especially when using new media. Audio-tours for example generate the unintended side effect that it is a quite individual,
isolated experience: it can put individual visitors in a bubble, making it difficult for them to keep track of companions or family members, let alone chat about what they have
seen [Ang06]. In spite of the many opportunities and benefits a PDA-tour can offer, recent research on the visitors’ use
of the first PDA-tours in museums does share the same conclusion [VH05]: “the PDA makes it difficult for visitors to
talk and engage in discussion.” Main reason is that the hardware and content of the current solutions are designed and
structured for retrieval by one person rather than by multiple
persons.
2.3. Objectives
One of the main objectives of the project is to deal with the
(possible) negative side effects and therefore to encourage
and stimulate interaction between visitors and the museum
by use of the PDA. This can be done by providing opportunities to communicate with each other directly (using Voiceover-IP) and indirectly (by collaborative games) (see 3.1).
c The Eurographics Association 2006.

K. Luyten et al. / ARCHIE: Disclosing a Museum by a Socially-aware Mobile Guide

The inquiry of the museum also reveals that visitors have
different preferences concerning the way they want to learn
in a museum. Some visitors have a strong need for handson and minds-on activities and want to ’experience’ the museum (38%), while other prefer a rather reflective discovery
and space for abstract conceptualization (27%). There are
also differences in visit behaviour, preferred profundity and
nature of information, favourite type of media, object display
and interior design. Not to mention different levels of knowledge, ages, types of groups, and personal interests. While
traditional mobile museum guides often offer a uniform tour
and presentation, the ARCHIE project wants to discover the
opportunities and benefits of a personalized approach while
exploiting the social relationships between the visitors.
3. The ARCHIE Mobile Guide System
The ARCHIE Mobile Guide System provides a basis to develop customized mobile guides, that can differ in presentation (visualization), structure, behaviour and style but still
communicate the same content to the visitors. This is accomplished by a unified framework that can load an arbitrary interface shell. Independent of the interface shell, the
framework also offers other components such as a personto-person communication component and localization component, two services that enable a more immersive visitor
experience when using a PDA to visit a museum.
3.1. Group-Based Communication
Our Mobile Guide System provides different types of communication through the mobile device. A server application
keeps track of the different groups of visitors. During the
visit, the system allows visitors to communicate with other
visitors in the same group in two different ways:
• a direct communication style that is voice-based and uses
Voice-over-IP (VOIP). This allows a visitor to address the
other members of the same group directly and to talk with
each other regardless their locations. An audio forwarder
on the server handles the communication traffic. First user
tests pointed out that there is a little noise on the communication channel when nobody is talking; such noise
should be filtered out. A short delay on the messages is
not experienced as annoying.
• an indirect communication style that allows people to exchange other types of data related with the interface shell.
This style of communication does not require the visitor to
address the other visitors of the same group directly, rather
it is used by collaborative games to share game (shell) related data. The synchronization between different clients
involved in a collaborative game depends on the game and
should be taken care of by the shell developer.
Because the wireless network is deployed in the complete
museum, visitors can communicate with each other no matter their location in the museum. The combination of both
c The Eurographics Association 2006.

types of communication opens up several possibilities to implement collaborative applications such as games that need
to be played in group (e.g. by families, schools, ...).

3.2. Personalization and visualization
In section 2 we mentioned the importance of a personalized
approach to enhance the visitor’s museum experience. The
most visible part of the personalization component embedded in our Mobile Guide System are the different interface
shells that can be loaded. Figure 1 shows two possible interface shells: 1(a) shows the interface shell that is more
suitable for kids and 1(b) is an interface shell that is typically used for adult visitors. The multimedia tour for kids is
an animation movie with their buddy Orf who guides them
through the virtual world of the Neanderthal man. By clicking on the animated skull, an edugame can be started. Adults
receive a more formal presentation using realistic images
and accompanying short texts. By clicking on the picture
more information can be retrieved. These two different presentations (or visualizations) of the same content, explaining
the Neanderthal skeleton, are deployed on top of the same
Mobile Guide System. Since an interface shell is used to support a rather large group of users, further personalization is
required to increase the personal involvement and interaction
with the museum.
In order to create a more personalized museum visit, a
user profile has to be composed. This can be done in advance or dynamically during the museum visit. Entering a
user profile may not require much effort and time from the
visitor and therefore should be limited. When no profile is
entered, a default profile is provided. At each moment, the
user profile can be (manually) changed by the user. Notice
the creation of a user profile does not necessary exclude any
information for the visitor, it can also be used to highlight
information or change the presentation of the information
according to the user interests and preferences. If identical
information is available in different media types, one can
prefer e.g. an animation to a documentary movie.
Based on the user’s interactions with the device, the profile can be automatically adapted. Similar adaptations are
also investigated in the PEACH project [KBGB∗ 05]. The
way the visitor uses the digital content gives us a clue about
his preferences: stopping an explanation prematurely may
indicate a lack of interest, whereas asking for more, or bookmarking it, suggests a genuine interest. We use a weighted
algorithm to adapt the user profile: the user profile will
evolve slowly and does not change constantly, in order to
avoid confusion. According to the action the user takes, the
weights assigned to the different parts of the user profile will
be changed. The following non-exhaustive list shows actions
that can change the weights, they are listed in order of importance (actions at the top will have a greater influence than
the actions at the bottom):

K. Luyten et al. / ARCHIE: Disclosing a Museum by a Socially-aware Mobile Guide

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Interface shells for children and adults.

• Explicit questions about appreciation of what is currently
on screen;
• Bookmarking a current screen for later retrieval;
• Information retrieval actions (the user shows more interests in items he clicks on for more information);
• Time spent at a certain position (the user might want to
learn more about the displayed objects at that position).
Notice the time spent at a certain location can have very different reasons, so only when a certain threshold is reached
will this action be taken into account (e.g. a minimum
amount of time spent at a location while the user is actively
retrieving more information about an artefact in the vicinity).
We are currently experimenting with this kind of automatic
adaptation of user profiles in order to avoid forcing the visitor to go through a extensive questionnaire before starting
a visit. Preliminary tests have shown that this approach is
feasible.

3.3. Localization
Part of making the environment more immersive is done by
adding an indoor localization system. In most traditional settings, an electronic mobile guide requires the user to manually input the location by entering a number or scanning a
tag. Other rudimentary localization systems use IR-based localization techniques (e.g. Portable Cicero [CP03]). A more
advanced technology makes use of object recognition based
on an artefact’s photograph taken by the visitor [BBZB05].

Current networking technologies allow us to use the wireless network to give an estimate of the location of the user or
the proximity of the user to an artefact [BCLN05]. We use
this as an interaction modality: the user can interact with the
system by just moving around and changing her/his location.
Additional reasons why we currently use a WiFi-based localization technique are: the infrastructure will be available in
the museum, it provides a cheap way to support localization
and it offers us the required granularity.
Although there are several commercial solutions for indoor location detection available, we started with creating
a customized location detection system based on the signal
strengths of the various wireless access points in the vicinity of the user. Implementing a usable WiFi-based localization system turned out to be a challenging task: there are
still several ongoing research projects that try to accomplish
this [HFL∗ 04, YA05, CCC∗ 06]. The first drawback of using WiFi signals is that they tend to be quite erratic. Simply calculating the distance to the access point based upon
the strength of its received signals will give back anomalous results. Consequently, trilateration of those results will
not produce any accurate locations. We introduced a learning
phase where we collect fingerprints (a set of signal strengths
per access point per location) in the areas we need the localization algorithm to be more reliable. From this data we
can derive the probable signal strength on a whole set of locations. Afterwards we can use the set of measured signal
strengths per access point and search for the closest match
c The Eurographics Association 2006.

K. Luyten et al. / ARCHIE: Disclosing a Museum by a Socially-aware Mobile Guide

with the recorded signal strength of each access point to determine the location. In order to cut down on the processing
cost, only the best signals are used, since they tend to be the
most reliable. With this approach we find the location with
the highest probability.
While this approach gives good results in estimating the
location of the visitor in a static environment, in museum
settings with clusters of moving visitors the precision in locating visitors decreases. Though this may seem to result in
a system that is less usable, in an exploratory environment
such as a museum this could lead to a more enjoyable user
experience. Careful design of the application and its user interface can turn the lack of granularity into an asset that motivates the visitor to explore its environment, looking around
for information. Observations and interviews with children
who were exploring a museum by means of a PDA even indicated that they really liked to search for an artefact.

museum. If the shell also uses the communication service,
it is possible to start a conversation with another visitor, all
triggered by the event of the visitor approaching an artefact.
We are currently developing this framework and defining
its interface. Only the three core services presented in this
paper are currently used by the shells we developed, but one
can imagine other core services being included. Their functionality is still subject to changes and evolves according
to the requirements of the interface shells we are building
on top of the framework. However, the architecture of the
framework is created to be extensible and allows us to include other core services without changing the architecture.
Also creating new interface shells does not require a new
software structure since there is no hard binding between the
interface shells and the core services because of the event bus
interface.
5. Conclusions

4. Framework Overview
The different core components presented in section 3 are integrated in one framework. The shell developer can make
use of this framework to create a new shell that uses personalization, localization and communication. Figure 2 gives
an overview of the framework and shows the core services
that are available through the framework interface. The core
services are in fact proxies that communicate with a central server that keeps a database with visitor profiles, visitor
groups, artefact locations etc. This is completely transparent
for the shell developer.
Figure 2 shows the framework interface is structured as an
event bus: a user interface shell can subscribe to events originating from one of the services, and process these events
according to the shell. The event bus can also include direct
user interaction events (e.g. tapping on the screen), so both
direct and indirect interaction with the interface shell can be
easily supported. This approach results in a flexible mobile
guide system rather than one particular mobile guide: various shells that behave differently can be deployed on top of
this framework. By using the communication service a shell
will be able to engage in a collaborative game.
One example that we developed using the localization service are the ’artefact notification messages’. These type of
messages will notify the visitor when she/he approaches a
particular artefact. This is accomplished as follows: the shell
developer registers for events from the localization service
and events from the personalization service. The personalization service can be queried for artefacts that are of high
interest to the visitor according to its profile. The proximity of the visitor with regard to these artefacts is available
through the localization service. An interface shell can use
this data to emphasize information in the user interface. Figure 1(a) shows the skull in the presentation is highlighted:
this is caused by the visitor approaching a skull object in the
c The Eurographics Association 2006.

Starting from the new objective of the museum to create
an optimal learning experience for different visitor groups,
and the project objective to discover the opportunities and
benefits of a personalized approach while exploiting the social relationships of the visitors, we created a framework
to build customized mobile guides that meet these desires.
In contrast to many existing systems that work similar to a
portable information kiosk, the ARCHIE Mobile Guide System stimulates interaction among visitors while offering a
personalized interface and enhancing the immersive feeling
of the visitor in the museum environment. Three core services were developed and integrated into one unified system
to accommodate this: a group communication facility, automatic personalization and localization detection. An event
based framework integrates these core services, so different
interface shells may use these services and can co-exist. Collaborative applications can be built using these services and
the framework.
Acknowledgments
This work was partly funded through EFRO, as part of ’Objective 2 - Programme Limburg 2000-2006 and the Phasingout Programme 2000-2005, Measure 2: Technology and Innovation, Action 4: Stimulating the product development in
the field of multimedia applications concerning culture and
cultural heritage’.
We would also like to thank the museum staff of the GalloRoman Museum for close cooperation.
References
[Ang06] A NGLISS S.: Talking Sense. Museum Practice
Magazine, 34 (2006).
[BBZB05]

B RUNS E., B ROMBACH B., Z EIDLER T.,

K. Luyten et al. / ARCHIE: Disclosing a Museum by a Socially-aware Mobile Guide

Figure 2: Framework overview

B IMBER O.: Enabling Mobile Phones To Support LargeScale Museum Guidance. Tech. rep., Bauhaus University
Weimar (Media Faculty), 2005.
[BCLN05] B ORRIELLO G., C HALMERS M., L A M ARCA
A., N IXON P.: Delivering real-world ubiquitous location
systems. Commun. ACM 48, 3 (2005), 36–41.
[CCC∗ 06] C HAN L.-W., C HIANG J.-R., C HEN Y.-C.,
NAN K E C., H SU J., C HU H.-H.: Collaborative Localization: Enhancing WiFi-Based Position Estimation with
Neighborhood Links in Clusters. In Pervasive (2006),
pp. 50–66.
[CP03] C IAVARELLA C., PATERNÒ F.: Design criteria for
location-aware, indoor, pda applications. In Mobile HCI
(2003), pp. 131–144.

[KBGB∗ 05] K UFLIK T., B. C ALLAWAY C., G OREN BAR D., ROCCHI C., S TOCK O., Z ANCANARO M.:
Non-intrusive User Modeling for a Multimedia Museum Visitors Guide System. In User Modeling (2005),
pp. 236–240.
[Mor02] M ORRISSEY K.: Pathways Among Objects and
Museum Visitors. In Perspectives on Object-Centered
Learning in Museums (2002), Paris S., (Ed.), Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
[PGR05] Provincial Gallo-Roman Museum. Quantitative
learning target group research, 2005.

Exploratorium Electronic Guidebook Forum,

[PT03] P ROCTOR N., T ELLIS C.: The State of the Art in
Museum Handhelds in 2003. In Museums and the Web
2003 (Toronto, Canada, 2003), Archives & Museum Informatics, pp. 227–238.

[FD00] FALK J., D IERKING L.: Learning from Museums:
Visitor Experiences and the Making of Meaning. Altamira
Press, Walnut Creek, 2000.

[PW02] P ISCITELLI B., W EIER K.: Learning With,
Through, and About Art: The Role of Social Interactions.
In Perspectives on Object-Centered Learning in Museums
(2002), Paris S., (Ed.), Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

[Fis05] F ISHER S.: An Evaluation of Learning on the
Move and Science Navigator. Using PDAs in Museum,
Heritage and Science Centre Settings. 2005.

[VH05] VOM L EHN D., H EATH C.: Accounting for New
Technology in Museum Exhibitions. International Journal of Arts Management 7, 3 (2005).

[HFL∗ 04] H AEBERLEN A., F LANNERY E., L ADD A.,
RUDYS A., WALLACH D., K AVRAKI L.: Practical robust
localization over large-scale 802.11 wireless networks. In
MobiCom ’04: Proceedings of the 10th annual international conference on Mobile computing and networking
(New York, NY, USA, 2004), ACM Press, pp. 70–84.

[YA05] YOUSSEF M., AGRAWALA A.:
The Horus
WLAN Location Determination System. In MobiSys ’05:
Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Mobile systems, applications, and services (New York, NY,
USA, 2005), ACM Press, pp. 205–218.

[Exp05]
2005.

c The Eurographics Association 2006.

View public

