Aalborg Universitet

Augmenting the City with Fiction: Fictional Requirements for Mobile Guides
Kjeldskov, Jesper; Paay, Jeni
Published in:
Proceedings of HCI in Mobile Guides, Mobile HCI 2007

Publication date:
2007
Document Version
Early version, also known as pre-print
Link to publication from Aalborg University

Citation for published version (APA):
Kjeldskov, J., & Paay, J. (2007). Augmenting the City with Fiction: Fictional Requirements for Mobile Guides. In
K. Cheverst (Ed.), Proceedings of HCI in Mobile Guides, Mobile HCI 2007 (pp. 1-6). University of Lancaster.
http://people.cs.aau.dk/~jesper/pdf/conferences/Kjeldskov-C45.pdf

General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
? Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
? You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
? You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ?
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: December 04, 2021

Augmenting the City with Fiction:
Fictional Requirements for Mobile Guides
Jesper Kjeldskov and Jeni Paay
Aalborg University
Department of Computer Science
Fredrik Bajers Vej 7E
DK-9220 Aalborg East, Denmark

{jesper, jeni}@cs.aau.dk
ABSTRACT

the move with facts about the reality that they are in. However,
let’s face it, people cannot live by reality alone! Reality is
everywhere. It is right there in our face when we wake up in the
morning, and it continues to sneak up on us throughout our day, in
the car, in our offices, in the tearoom, and at the dinner table. In
recent years it has even invaded our TVs; not only through eternal
streams of live news from wherever, but also through endlessly
boring reality TV shows documenting minute-by-minute details of
peoples’ mundane lives. Perhaps this is why we spend quite a lot
of effort (and money) on escaping reality. People need
wonderment [19]. We daydream, we go to the cinema, we rent a
video, or we read or listen to a book. We like to immerse
ourselves in imaginary worlds and stories as way of escaping
every day life. We like to immerse ourselves in fiction.

In this position paper, we discuss the user experience of a new
genre of mobile guide services, which augments the users’
physical surroundings with fiction rather than with facts. First, we
outline sources of inspiration from fiction, storytelling in place
and on the move, and related research within the area of
interactive narratives and location-based games. We then present
and discuss five overall types of fictional mobile guides embodied
by the metaphors of 1) treasure hunts, 2) jig-saw puzzles, 3)
playing dominos, 4) playing scrabble, and 5) collecting butterflies.
Finally, we describe a preliminary design idea for a prototype
system intended to explore the design, implementation, and user
experience of fictional mobile guides.

So why not let mobile guides provide people with fiction about
their physical surroundings rather than just facts? Inspired by this
question, we have engaged with a stream of research exploring the
user experiences achieved by “augmenting the city with fiction”
and looking at some fundamental questions related to doing this.
How can mobile guides provide for peoples’ desire for fictional
content? How can quality storytelling benefit from its listeners
being on the move or located in a particular place? How can we
characterise different types of context-aware or location-based
stories? How can we narrate engaging stories, which take into
consideration the listener’s location, movements over time, and
perhaps even social context? How can we design and implement
useable media for this genre of storytelling? In short, what are the
fictional requirements of a mobile guide?

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H5.2. [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI)]:
User Interfaces - User-centred design, Graphical user interfaces.

General Terms
Design, Human Factors.

Keywords
Location-Based Services, Interactive Narratives, Fiction

1. BACKGROUND
In our recent research, we have been exploring the design,
implementation, and user experience of context-aware and
location-based mobile information services, which “augment the
city” with a digital layer of information about, for example,
people, places and the users’ physical surroundings [14]. Common
for our research has been that the systems and services explored
have provided users with factual information, that would
sometimes otherwise be invisible, from which people could then
decide what to do while socialising out on the town; where to go,
how to get there, what to do there, who to meet up with etc. In
many ways, this matches the majority of research and design
being done within the area of mobile guides: providing users on

2. INSPIRATION AND RELATED WORK
Making interactive narratives and relating stories to locations are
not new ideas on their own. However, combining the two into
dynamic narratives that respond to the users/receiver’s location
and interactions in physical space over time is a relatively new
phenomenon with key references in the research literature dating
only a few years back.
Early context-aware mobile guides such as Cyberguide [1], the
Lancaster GUIDE [7] and Hippie [18] provided visitors, city
travellers and museum tourists with location-based experiences
which included pertinent information and guidance about their
current location, but did not focus on narrative issues. However
they act as useful vehicles for exploring and understanding
important interaction and technical issues about designing mobile
guides. Location-based mobile games such as Pirates! [4],
ARQuake [20], Mindwarping [21] and Can You See Me Now? [2]
offer inspiration for potential new applications for location-based
technologies, and offer us additional vehicles for studying

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
MobileHCI ’07, September, 2007, Singapore.
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0004…$5.00.

1

important aspects of interaction design for emerging contextaware technologies designed to operate ‘in the wild’. In particular,
Can You See Me Now?, with its engaging artistic experience of
seamlessly connecting online players in a virtual world to play
against real players in the actual city, demonstrates new potentials
for human interaction with computers and with each other.

an element of storytelling to our lives in situations where we have
previously had to resort to the printed word (i.e. on the way to
work in the train) or broadcast media and narratives, and therefore
centrally controlled (i.e. listening to the radio while driving). Now
we can decide what we want to listen to and where – so why not
take this further and incorporate our surrounding environment into
the story.

Beyond these applications that provide users with a
straightforward gaming experience, is the emerging area of
location-based games, which incorporate stories into the mix to
enhance the user experience with fiction. Backseat Playground
[12] provides a narrated experience interweaving a crime mystery,
visible physical elements of the environment and gaming for
children sitting in the back seat of a car, while on a journey. Uncle
Roy All Around You [3] is a programmed game that involves the
surrounding city, live actors, online and street players to follow a
set of pre-scripted clues to find Uncle Roy’s office.

3. AUGMENTING THE CITY w. FICTION
Inspired by the works and research described above, we have
explored conceptual ideas for mobile guide systems that augment
the city with fiction related to the users’ location and immediate
surroundings. So far, our work has consisted of literature research
and a series of open-ended brainstorming sessions and design
workshops during the first half of 2007. In these sessions and
workshops we have particularly focussed on the interplay between
stories, locations, time, and people’s social context, as well as
exploring the interplay between interactivity and narrative
structure. From this preliminary work, we have produced five
metaphors for different types of fictional mobile guides:

The delivery of location-based stories using mobile technology is
a new area of research, which includes applications such as Urban
Tapestries [13], Riot! [5], Hopstory [17] and Geist [15]. Urban
Tapestries is a collection of stories, histories, experiences and
events of a community linked to familiar and related locations.
Riot! delivers authored episodes triggered by specific locations
about an historical riot that happened in and around Queens
Square where the installation operates. Hopstory allows visitors to
an historic brewery to collect location related video vignettes as
they navigate the building, and then view their collected story at
the end of the visit. Geist provides and augmented reality
experience for visitors to the city of Heidelberg, which combines
history and fiction to allow the viewer to experience how it felt to
be in that city during the 30 Years’ War in the 17th century. These
applications are the most inspiring for our current research as they
provide experience and understanding of peoples responses to a
city augmented with fiction.

1)

Treasure hunts

2)

Jig-saw puzzles

3)

Dominos

4)

Scrabble

5)

Collecting butterflies

These are described in detail below.

3.1 Five Metaphors for Fictional Guides
3.1.1 Treasure hunts
“Treasure hunts” are linear
stories characterized by a fixed
series of parts or chapters,
which the receiver has to read
or listen to in correct sequence,
as prescribed by the author, in
order to get to the end. As
when finding a hidden treasure
from a map, they have to
follow the correct path on the
treasure map to get from a
designated starting point to the
place marked by the red X.

Anecdotally, people’s desire for storytelling and important aspects
of that fiction can be seen in popular stories of our time. Many
best-selling novels illustrate the appeal of blurring of boundaries
between fact and fiction, supporting the need for the “suspension
of disbelief’” in story telling. The Da Vinci Code [6] sold over
60.5 million copies, was translated into 44 languages world-wide,
is the thirteenth best selling book of all time, and inspired a
feature-length movie which was the second highest grossing
movie of 2006, world-wide. The Da Vinci Code establishes its
sense of intrigue and allurement from a clever interweaving of
things that we know to be historical facts and real places with
“believable” stories involving these elements. Crime fiction
becomes all the more evocative when it locates its scenes in
places that we are familiar with, and invites us to believe that this
has happened in that location. For example, crime stories by the
prolific Melbourne writer, Kerry Greenwood, about a Melbourne
baker [9][10][11] walks us through the streets of Melbourne and
possibilities of dark happenings that we are unaware might be
occurring in the city we think we know so well. This technique is
also brought into play in several location-based storytelling
applications, for example, Riot! [5] Hopstory [17] and Geist [15],
all bring this technique into play.

Applying the “treasure hunt” metaphor to the user experience of a
fictional mobile guide, this means that users have to move
physically from place to place, in the correct sequence, in order to
get through the story as envisioned by the author. The story has a
fixed starting location as well as a fixed end location. This
provides the author with a large degree of control over the
narrative in terms of classic principles of storytelling such as
creating a plot, building up tension, deciding, introducing key
characters at key times, etc. However, because each fragment of
the “treasure hunt” story is linked to a specific physical location,
the author furthermore gains an opportunity to use features of this
location as a powerful backdrop for their story (e.g. visuals,
sounds, smells, buildings, typical people etc.). At the same time,
of course, this also makes the story sensitive to the dynamics of
physical space, for example, throughout the day and the night and
across the different seasons of the year. From a user experience
point of view, “treasure hunt” types of fiction in the city require a

Further supporting our understanding that people are looking for
aural input while on the move is the meteoric rise in popularity of
the iPod, mp3 players generally, and now mobile phones with
audio listening capabilities to supplement and even disconnect
people from their daily realities. This has recently been extended
beyond music to the downloading of pod-casts and e-books to add

2

high level of mobility and interaction in the physical world, but
provide a low level of interactivity with the actual narrative both
in terms of its content and in terms of its composition.

can be paired by means of similarity from one to another. The first
piece limits the number of possible subsequent pieces, and only
through specific other pieces can some others now be fitted.

Uncle Roy All Around You [3] is an example of this type of
fictional mobile guide, where you need to follow pre-scripted
clues to get to a specific end point, with clues attached to specific
locations.

Applying the “dominos” metaphor to the user experience of a
fictional mobile guide, when people pick up a story in a place, the
next story given to them will have some sort of link with this one.
As an example, entering a café may trigger a story about a murder
in this place, which could then trigger a story about a related
murder on a ship when subsequently going to the docks. Starting
at the docks, however, could trigger a story about a sailor
discharging from his ship, which could then trigger a story about a
love affair between a sailor and a barmaid when subsequently
going to the café. Each story is loosely related to the previous one
but the author does not predetermine pairing them. From the
author’s point of view, this gives complete control over each short
story in terms of storytelling, and each story can be tailored to
match the backdrop of a particular physical location. Through
careful selection of keywords for pairing of stories, the author can
to some extend influence the possible sequences by which stories
can be put together. From a user experience perspective,
“dominos” types of fiction in the city have limited interactivity in
terms of controlling what story is presented where, but at the same
time each user interaction along the way has a large impact on
future discourse. Associations between each specific story provide
the thread through the overall experience.

3.1.2 Jig-saw puzzles
“Jig-saw puzzles” are nonlinear stories characterized
by consisting of a number
of parts or chapters that the
receiver may read or listen
to in any order they like in
order to create the whole
story. Just like assembling a
jigsaw puzzle, the user has
to work out which pieces fit together in order to create a
meaningful whole. Any piece can be picked up at any time, but
each piece only makes sense in relation to particular other pieces.
The sequence of assembly does not affect the outcome in itself but
may influence peoples’ experience of the story. All pieces have to
be considered in order to complete the picture.
Applying the “jigsaw puzzle” metaphor to a fictional mobile
guide, users are free to pick up the different pieces of a story
located around the city in any sequence they like, but have to find
all the pieces, and put them together themselves, in order to
complete the story as thought of by the author. The story has no
fixed starting location and no fixed end location. Obviously, this
takes some of the author’s control away in respect to the flow of
the narrative, and requires the author to create meaningful
fragments that can be read or listened to individually and in
random order. However, from a user experience point of view,
“jigsaw puzzle” types of fiction in the city increase the level of
interactivity in terms of composition, and have a built-in quality
for exploration in terms of finding the next piece as well as
putting the pieces together. For example, one story fragment may
inspire what pieces to look for next, and contain clues about
where in the city to find them.

Hopstory [17] with its linear plot, delivered from different
character viewpoints, provides a collection of scenes, which are
interesting entities in themselves. They are collected at specific
locations but in any order, and can be strung together at the end of
the experience to create an ordered story, which is loosely
controlled by time thereby exhibiting the characteristics of a
“dominos” type fictional mobile guide. Backseat Playground [12]
can also be regarded as this type of guide as its linear plot allows
user interaction with the system to influence the story to branch in
different directions.

3.1.4 Scrabble
“Scrabble” describes stories that
have
a
high
interactive
complexity and, for example,
consists
of
many
small
fragments, which can be put
together in a large number of
ways
(with
and
without
meaning). Similar to playing
scrabble, the user is offered a
number of random pieces, which may be put together to a larger
whole. Each piece has very limited meaning on its own, but
together they can make up meaningful constellations. As an
example, a “scrabble” type of fiction in the city could take place
on board a tram or bus and not only respond to the precincts
moving past the windows but also to the people getting on and off
during the journey sensed through, for example, Bluetooth phones
and personal profiles. Every time a new passenger boards the
tram, information from his or her profile is used to give the stories
offered to the other passengers a new possible direction.

Riot! [5] can be regarded as fictional mobile guide of this type, as
it uses a collection of separate vignettes, all about one central
story, which can be collected at controlled locations and pieced
together by the listener to create a cohesive picture of the entire
drama.

3.1.3 Dominos
“Dominos” are selections of selfcontained short stories related to
physical locations where the next
possible story depends on the
current one. There is no overall
storyline, and not necessarily an
end (unless all the pieces have
been used), and the sum of the
pieces does not necessarily make
up a greater whole (as with the
jigsaw puzzle). However, each
step of the way there a link from one story to the next by means of
some similarity between them. The meaning lies in the transition.
Similar to playing dominos, each piece is a separate entity, but

From the authors’ point of view, applying the “scrabble”
metaphor makes it highly challenging to create meaningful stories
by traditional means of storytelling because most of the control is
left either in the hands of the users or in the hands of the
serendipity of events taking place around them. As with all highly

3

dynamic and interactive narratives, this, of course, also makes
“scrabble” type of fictional mobile guides highly challenging to
implement. At the same time, however, it also opens up for highly
immersive and engaging user experiences with a high level of
interactivity as well as intriguing uncertainty about what and who
it is in their surroundings that influences the course of a story.

similar kind. The resulting collection is a highly individual
patchwork of entities put together in a way that makes sense to
each individual person.
The “collecting butterflies” metaphor provides a relatively simple
approach to creating a fictional mobile guide. When a person
enters a particular place, he or she is offered a number of stories
that fit this location. When moving to another place, he or she is
offered different stories. Staying at the same place for a longer
period of time may cause more stories to appear or some stories to
disappear. As for “dominos”, the “collecting butterflies” metaphor
gives the author full narrative control over each short story in
terms of sequence and relation to particular physical surroundings.
However, control in terms of the creation of an overall picture is
in the hands of the user. This results in a user experience that is
highly interactive and exploratory on one side, but at the same
time is also opaque and constrained.

A mobile fictional guide experience that exemplifies this
metaphor is Geist [15]. From an availability of many different
story pieces, the player uses pieces of stories collected from
different locations to put together their own, personally unique
story by the end of the experience. They also collect pieces of
history and information along the way that do not necessarily
form part of that final story, but are interesting pieces themselves.

3.1.5 Collecting Butterflies
“Collecting butterflies” are
selections of self-contained
short stories related to
physical locations but with
no predetermined relation
to each other. Hence, as
with “dominos”, there is
not a greater storyline
beyond the whole created
by the receivers themselves. Similar to collecting butterflies,
people are free to explore the physical space around them in
pursuit of stories they like to collect. They may pick up an
interesting story that they have spotted in their surroundings, take
a closer look at it, keep it, let it go, or go looking for others of a

Urban Tapestries [13] is a mobile fictional guide where the user
can “collect butterflies” by roaming the city and collecting
autonomous individual stories and histories which are overlaying
the city in pertinent places.

4. A PRELIMINARY DESIGN IDEA
As a preliminary study, we are exploring the “collecting
butterflies” approach to fiction in the city through the design of a
simple prototype application. The idea of the system is to provide
the reader with audio short stories related to their physical
location, but at the same time to also provide the listener with
some means of interaction influencing what story they are given

Figure 1. An example of “collecting butterflies” type of fiction in the city combined with ambiguous user interaction. By taking a
picture with her mobile phone camera of a particular part of a painting situated in the park, the user will receive an audio short
story related to this location and the particular motive captured. It could, for example, involve the old clock tower.
4

in a way that is playful, ambiguous [8] and opaque rather than
goal-oriented and transparent. Technically, we wanted the design
to be lightweight, use off-the-shelf mobile technologies (i.e.
mobile phones with a built-in camera, MMS, and audio playback
capabilities), and not require dedicated software to be installed.

systems embodying other metaphors described in order to
investigate their strengths and weaknesses, we also wish to
investigate which different types and genres of stories fit well
with each of the described metaphors.

REFERENCES

Firstly, a number of salient locations around the city area of
Aalborg are selected, and classified by location keywords (e.g.
“waterfront”, “inner city”, “park”, “backstreets” etc.). Secondly,
each physical location is captured in a painting with strong
colours, which is digitised, printed as a large poster, and installed
in a visible position at the depicted location. Each poster
installation is given a unique ID number visible on the front along
with a phone number for the storytelling service. Thirdly, around
a hundred selected short stories (5-10 min) are recorded digitally,
and classified by the same keywords used for classifying
locations. Each story is also colour coded in terms of its general
“mood”, after Marcus [16] (e.g. in Western culture, black = fear,
red = passion, blue = calm, green = safety, yellow = happiness,
white = purity). Thus, stories are related to locations and are also
indirectly linked to the colours of the paintings.

[1] Abowd, G., Atkeson, C., Hong, J., Long, S., Kooper, R., and
Pinkerton, M. Cyberguide: A mobile context-aware tour
guide. Wireless Networks, 3 (1997), 421-433.
[2] Benford, S., Crabtree, A., Flintham, M., Drozd, A., Anastasi,
R., Paxton, M., Tandavanitj, N., Adams, M., and Row-Farr,
J. Can You See Me Now? ACM TOCHI, 13, 1 (2006), 100133.
[3] Benford, S., Seager, W., Flintham, M., Anastasi, R.,
Rowland, D., Humble, J., Stanton, D., Bowers, J.,
Tandavanitj, N., Adams, M., Row-Farr, J., Oldroyd, A., and
Sutton, J. (2004) The error of our ways: the experience of
self-reported position in a location-based game, Proceedings
of UbiComp 2004, Springer, London, 2004, 70—87.
[4] Bjork, S., Falk, J., Hansson, R., Ljungstrand, P. Pirates!
Using the Physical World as a Game Board. In Proceedings
of Interact 2001. IOS Press, Netherlands, 2001.

The envisioned user experience of the system is as follows. When
people wander around, they identify fictionally augmented areas
by spotting the painting installations set up around the city. They
can then walk up to one of these installations, take a picture of a
given part of the painting with their phone-camera, and send this
picture along with the ID number as an MMS to the phone
number specified. The service then sorts out the location of the
listener, and also analyses the picture for prominent colours (or a
predefined “hot spot” in the painting). In response, a short story is
selected that matches the location of the reader, and the colours
(or hot spot) of the posted picture. This is then returned to the
listener as audio attachment to an MMS message, who can now
take the story with them and listen to it through their headset. At
any time, the listener can repeat the process; take another picture,
send it to the storytelling service, and receive a new short story.
By logging the phone numbers used to post MMS messages, the
service makes sure that the same story is not returned to a listener
more than once.

[5] Blythe, M., Reid, J., Wright, P., and Geelhoed, E.
Interdisciplinary criticism: analysing the experience of riot! a
location-sensitive digital narrative. Behaviour & Information
Technology, 25, 2 (2006), 127-139.
[6] Brown, D. The Da Vinci Code. Bantam Books, UK, 2003.
[7] Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Mitchell, K., Friday, A., and
Efstratiou, C. Developing a Context-aware Electronic Tourist
Guide: Some Issues and Experiences. In Proceedings of CHI
2000. ACM Press, New York, 2000, 17-24.
[8] Gaver, W., Beaver, J., and Benford, S. Ambiguity as a
Resource for Design. In Proceedings of CHI 2003. ACM
Press, New York, 233-240.
[9] Greenwood, K. Earthly Delights. Allen & Unwin, Australia,
2004.

As an alternative to MMS over GPRS, file exchange could be
done via Bluetooth through access points embedded into the
installations around the city. Audio file download could also be
done over the 3G network or through WiFi.

[10] Greenwood, K. Heavenly Pleasures. Allen & Unwin,
Australia, 2005.
[11] Greenwood, K. Devil’s Food. Allen & Unwin, Australia,
2006.

5. SUMMARY

[12] Gustafsson, A., Bichard, J., Brunnberg, L., Juhlin, O., and
Combetto, M. Believeable environments – Generating
interactive storytelling in vast location-based pervasive
games. In Proceedings of ACE 06. ACM Press, New York,
2006, Article no. 24.

We have proposed the concept of “augmenting the city with
fiction” as an approach to mobile guide services that presents their
users with stories related to their physical surroundings rather than
with facts about it. In an attempt to characterise different types of
possible fictional mobile guides, we have proposed five
metaphors describing different levels of narrative structure and
possible interactivity. Embodying one of these metaphors, the
metaphor of “collecting butterflies”, we have described a
preliminary design idea for a prototype installation, which offers a
collage of audio short stories through mobile phones in response
to the listeners’ location and their “opaque” interaction with the
service through picture-taking with their mobile phones.

[13] Jungnickel, K. Urban Tapestries: Sensing the City and other
Stories. Proboscis "Cultural Snapshot" no. 8, available at
http://urbantapestries.net/ (2004).
[14] Kjeldskov J. and Paay J. Public Pervasive Computing:
Making the Invisible Visible. IEEE Computer 39, 9 (2006),
60-65.
[15] Malaka, R., Schneider, K., and Kretschmer, U. Stage-Based
Augmented Edutainment. In LCNS 3031 (2004), 54-65.

Our future work involves the detailed design and implementation
of this idea into a solid service that allows for longitudinal use by
a large number of people. Future work also involves the
development of design ideas and prototype fictional mobile guide

[16] Marcus, A. Graphic Design for Electronic Documents and
User Interfaces. ACM Press, New York, 1991.

5

[17] Nisi, V., Wood, A., Davenport, G., and Oakley, I. Hopstory:
an Interactive, Location-based Narrative Distributed in Space
and Time. In Proceedings of TIDSE 2004. Springer, Berlin,
2004, 132-141.

[20] Piekarski, W. and Thomas, B. ARQuake: The Outdoors
Augmented Reality System. Communcations of the ACM, 45,
1 (2002), 36-38.
[21] Starner, T., Liebe, B., Singletary, B., and Pair, J. MINDWARPING: Towards Creating a Compelling Collaborative
Augmented Reality Game. In Proceedings of IUI 2000.
ACM Press, New York, 2000, 256-259.

[18] Oppermann, R. and Specht, M. A Context-sensitive Nomadic
Information System as an Exhibition Guide. In Proceedings
of HUC2K. Springer-Verlag, London, 2000, 127-142
[19] Paulos, E and Beckman, C. Sashay: Designing for
Wonderment. In Proceedings of CHI 2006. ACM Press, New
York, 2006, 881-884.

6

