Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 46 (2012) 410 – 416

WCES 2012

Augmented reality smartphone environment orientation application:
a case study of the Fu-Jen University mobile campus touring system
Te-Lien Chou a *, Lih-Juan ChanLin b
a

Graduate student, Department of Library and Information Science,
Fu-Jen Catholic University, 510 Zhongzheng Rd., Xinzhuang Dist., New Taipei City,24205, Taiwan (R.O.C)
b
Professor, Department of Library and Information Science,
Fu-Jen Catholic University, 510 Zhongzheng Rd., Xinzhuang Dist., New Taipei City,24205, Taiwan (R.O.C)

Abstract
Traditionally, environment orientations are given via signposts, tour guides, or through the web. However, these methods cannot
construct a personal context-aware learning environment. With the advancement of augmented reality (AR) and smart phone
devices containing a built-in camera, Internet connection, GPS technology and a compass device, mobile learning, or ubiquitous
context-aware learning, becomes easy and boundary-free. AR technology creates a user-centered, visualized operation, and a
real-time-feedback learning environment. For campus touring purposes, AR enhances users learning interest, and therefore
reinforces learning. To explore how AR mobile learning can help visitors become familiar with an environment, a smart phone
AR implementation tool, Layar, was used. A prototype campus touring system for Fu-Jen Catholic University was developed
and reviewed by two focus groups (freshmen). Interview data were collected. The thoughts and reactions from these two focus
groups were summarized. Findings of the research reveal that the smart phone AR campus touring system provides hidden
information in a real environment, giving freshmen instant assistance if they have gotten lost, and is a good personal mobile
learning tool. However, to make the smart phone AR touring more effective, suggestions are provided for further
implementation.
©
2012Published
PublishedbybyElsevier
Elsevier
Ltd.
© 2012
Ltd.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of Prof. Dr. Hüseyin Uzunboylu
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Keywords: Campus touring system, Augmented reality, Context-aware learning, Mobile learning;

1. Introduction
As mobile technology becomes an essential in daily life, learners are no longer constrained by time and location.
They can access and share information anytime and anywhere. With the advancement of smart phones embedded
with GPS technology, compass devices, and cameras, visitors can quickly find their orientation and directions in a
real life environment. When working with mobile applications, a user must consider some requirements:
computation platform, display, tracking sensor to obtain information, and wearable input and interaction
technologies. Currently, these requirements make the creation of a mobile augmented reality system a challenging
task. (Höllerer & Feiner, 2004; Jaramillo et al, 2010).
* Te-Lien Chou. Tel.: +886-9-8999-3547
E-mail address: chou81@gmail.com

1877-0428 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of Prof. Dr. Hüseyin Uzunboylu

Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.05.132

Te-Lien Chou and Lih-Juan ChanLin / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 46 (2012) 410 – 416

411

Many universities are providing smart phone campus touring systems, and in this way allowing potential
students, alumni, or visitors to familiarize themselves with the campus via self-guided devices. For self-learning
and information-access purposes, mobile learning is less dependent on the location, and is more contextual, and
pedagogically oriented to the constructivist and situated approaches (Boticki, Hoic-Bozic & Budiscak, 2009). By
means of AR, the user can access hidden textual or graphical information, to see a picture of, for example, an
partially hidden building or to obtain additional information about it. AR appears as a mixed reality environment,
with one part being real and the other being virtual, with the real environment predominating. The specific
characteristics of an augmented environment have provided this mode of visualization with various possibilities for
human-computer interaction and for solving visualization and information access problems (Jaramillo et al, 2010).
In this paper, a mobile campus touring system employing AR technology was developed at Fu-Jen Catholic
University. Each year, about 5,500 freshmen enroll in this university. Most have to spend weeks to become
familiar with this unknown environment. As strangers, a personal and portable location-based service can help them
become familiar with their new environment and lead them to interesting sites.

2. Mobile campus tour
An effective and user centered touring system not only provides environment information to users, but also allow
users to quickly utilize useful resources and enhance environment awareness (Educause, 2005). Traditionally,
environment orientations are given via signposts, tour guides, or through the web. For individual touring purposes,
construction of a personal context-awareness of the environment is necessary. In providing environment
information, sites or buildings might contain history or context that requires a detailed description. Making the
descriptive content available to individuals provides a richer experience in interacting with those places or buildings
(Educause, 2005). This is especially true for new students who are still unfamiliar with current routines and
practices in a university. They may also have trouble finding their way around campus. Under such circumstances,
it is vital to have instant and personal information available (Asif & Krogstie, 2010). The use of AR is an
innovative alternative for bringing experiential and location based learning to students.

3. Augmented Reality
Augmented Reality is a variation of Virtual Reality. VR technology completely immerses users within a
synthetic environment where users cannot see the real world around him, whereas AR allows the user to see the real
world, with virtual objects superimposed upon or composited with the real world. AR supplements reality, rather
than completely replacing it. (Azuma, 1997). Augmented reality was created in the early 1990s by Boeing
researchers Caudell and Mizell (1992) who made a head-mounted video display designed to aid workers who were
assembling electrical systems. AR extends the real world with a layer of virtual information. It is particularly well
suited as a user interface for context-aware applications (Hollerer, et al, 1999).
AR provides a better solution for personal awareness of surrounding context, which might not be satisfied by
traditional approaches such as radios, maps, and handheld displays. For providing more powerful display paradigms
for interaction with contextual information embedded in the environment, Billinghurst, Kato, and Poupyrev (2001)
from Washington University created Magic Book, which overlaid 3D virtual imagery onto real books. Shelton &
Hedley (2002) used AR to teach undergraduate geography students earth-sun relationships to accommodate spatially
related knowledge. Kauffman (2003) from Vienny University created Constrct3D, a spatial and geometry
construction education tool for high school students. Li (2010) from New Mexico University’s ARIS used
Augmented Reality and Interactive Storytelling to let users to solve a fictional murder mystery in a physical
environment. Augmented Reality has the capability to significantly change the way in which information can be
delivered to individuals.

412

Te-Lien Chou and Lih-Juan ChanLin / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 46 (2012) 410 – 416

4. Related works
AR technology has been applied in various mobile devices as a self-guided tour. For example, at Columbia
University, the mobile AR campus navigation system was started in 1996. The project, MARS (Mobile Augmented
Reality Systems), allowed the user to walk around freely while having all necessary equipment mounted on his back
(Columbia CGUI Lab, 1999). In 2010, Columbia University started the smart phone campus tour system, where
visitors can simply use their own iPhones, iPhone touch, and Android phones to experience campus history
(Columbia University, 2010). In UK, the University of Exeter created an AR dynamic landscape of flora and fauna.
Using Augmented Reality, the campus was transformed into an accessible learning resource to support the formal
and informal curriculum (University of Exeter, 2010). In Taiwan, National Taiwan University implemented an
iPhone AR campus touring system (National Taiwan University, 2010). Users might use the personal mobile
orientation alternative to discover the history of the campus.
In addition to commercial and customized smart phone campus touring systems, Freeware is available for
creating AR experiences, including Layar (www.layar.com), Mixare (http://code.google.com/p/mixare/), Wikitude
(http://www.wikitude.com/), and Junino (http://www.junaio.com/). Founded in 2009, Layar is widely used and
supports iOS, Android, and Symbian platforms. Many universities adopt Layar to build their campus touring
systems, including Purdue University (2009), University of Wisconsin - Madison division (n.d), West Virginia
University (2010), Arizona State University (n.d), Georgia Tech Atlanta (2009), etc. In this study, Layar was used
to develop the Fu-Jen University mobile campus touring system. The following is the design procedure and
structure.
5. System Overview
The development of the mobile campus touring system applied the freeware tool Layar. In addition, Hoppala
was used for the remote data server. Google Sketchup was used for the 3D icon creations, and photoshop was used
for 2D photo modifications. Digital camera, recording devices, and a personal computer with Internet access were
also tools for system implementation. Prior to building application, touring content was analyzed and planned. The
procedure of implementing this system began by taking photos of the buildings and places in the campus, creating
3D icons representing the function of these building and places, and recording narratives for audio navigation
(Figure 1). Then, these data were input into Hoppala by pinpointing each point of interest. The Hoppala overlay
URL was inserted into the Layar API endpoint. Several 3D photos were used as touring system icons along with a
brief introduction.

Fig. 1 FJU Mobile campus touring system design procedure
The structure of the Fu-Jen University mobile campus touring system follows the Layar’s architecture. When
starting the system, a user can set the search range between 0-5 meters, and select the types of buildings or places he
or she wishes to visit, such as a certain library, a building, a restaurant, plays ground, or a dorm. A designated 3D

Te-Lien Chou and Lih-Juan ChanLin / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 46 (2012) 410 – 416

413

icon appears on the screen to indicate buildings or places in front of him or her. After identifying the destination,
the user can see a textual introduction, listen to the audio touring narrative, or get directions (see Figure 2).
Based on the system structure, the system operation procedure of the mobile touring system is illustrated in figure
3, and a scenario is described as follows: A user heads to the main library with his smart phone. Starting from the
main entrance, he sees through the campus via the built-in camera of the smart phone, in front of which shows him
the library building was built in 1998 according to the textual intro. He selects the recording button to listen to the
history of the building. He finally selects direction guidance to walk him to the final destination.

Fig. 2 FJU Mobile campus touring system structure

.
Fig. 3 User instruction
6. User feedback
The prototype of the Fu-Jen mobile touring system was designed and developed in 2010. To provide formative
information, pilot testing was conducted among the small groups of students. Subjects volunteering for pilot testing
were college freshmen at Fu-Jen Catholic University. They were encouraged to reflect on their experiences in using
the system. Interviews were used to obtain thoughts and reactions from the two focus groups. User feedback was
summarized as followed.
6.1. Positive feedback:
6.1.1. Smart phones give a personal navigation experience
Participants recalled their experience with the first campus orientation was performed quickly. They had no prior
directions about where to go, however, with the smart phone touring system, they could check out information
anytime and anywhere.
“I remember it was after the welcome party, the seniors took us for a walk around the campus,
but it ended quickly. They expected we would explore the campus ourselves sooner or later.”

414

Te-Lien Chou and Lih-Juan ChanLin / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 46 (2012) 410 – 416

“There was one time we got lost in Taipei city. By using the GPS system from the iPhone, we
were able to find our way shortly after. Therefore, I consider the GPS system (mobile campus
touring system with GPS technology) useful when we are lost in the campus.”
6.1.2. AR information presentation provides context-awareness learning
With 3D icons appearing on top of the physical environment, all participants were able to instantly obtain
contextual information about specific buildings or places. Textual introduction also give them quick information
about their destination, for example, they can stay 5 meters away and see the opening hour of the libraries without
walking into the library to ask.
“For example, if I want to know the opening hours of the library when I am busy, I don’t have
to walk all the way to the library, or try to find the phone number and make a phone call, or
even use a computer to go to the library’s website. I can simply take out my smart phone, point
to the library from a distance, and the opening hours are displayed on my screen.”
6.1.3. Instant directions give users convenient assistance
With an 86-acre campus, newcomers quite easily get lost amid all the buildings. With instant direction guide, a
freshman does not have to worry about spending too much time on finding the location for the next class. Students
also responded to the need of AR applications for daily activities from their new environments.
“It was about the 1st or 2nd week when I first came to the school, and I was still unfamiliar
with this environment. I got lost in the campus twice. One time was in the day, and the other
was at night. I was so frightened at that moment”
“If you simply look at the building, you would never know when it was built, and what it is
for. With AR information, you will see its attributes. For example, you will know what is
served in this restaurant. The augmented information brings added convenience to my school
life.”
6.2. Suggestions:
6.2.1. Social networking connection
Social media brings people closer. Many participants suggested the mobile campus touring should incorporate
social networking tools like FaceBook or Plurk, so visitors could share their ideas with others while exploring the
campus.
“It took me a couple weeks to get familiar with the campus, by then I might not need this
mobile touring system anymore. However, if I could add text onto it, or check out others’
messages, I would definitely continue to use this system.”
6.2.2. Hot spot coverage
Hot spot coverage is an important issue when using the mobile campus touring system in Fu-Jen Catholic
University. Since the 3G-signal service charge is still considered high for many individual students, free WIFI
signal services provided by the school is the primary source of going online. Unsuccessful transmission or broken
signals might decrease the mobility and accuracy of the mobile touring system.

Te-Lien Chou and Lih-Juan ChanLin / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 46 (2012) 410 – 416

415

“I once used the WIFI services on the campus of National Taiwan University, and its WIFI
signals were very strong, pretty much covering all the campus. However, it is another story at
our campus.”
7. Conclusion
In this study, using AR technology with smart phone capability, a prototype mobile campus touring system was
developed and evaluated. It was intended to allow all visitors to familiarize themselves with Fu-Jen campus using a
self-guided device. Based on the pilot testing, all users provided positive feedback about the mobile touring
experience, and they would like to use it and would recommend others to use it in the future. Currently, some finetuning is still being carried out.
Based on users’ suggestions, integration of the social network function into the mobile touring system is also
needed. Although the social function of the mobile touring system was not planned as intended for direction and
orientation, it might be a new design trend to reflect the need of users’ social networks. Therefore, adding
FaceBook functionality will be included as a new feature in the Fu-Jen mobile touring system.
In conclusion, AR technology surely shines a new light on user-centered, visualized operations, and the realtime-feedback learning environment. It has the capability to significantly change the way in which information can
be delivered to individual in daily activities. As smart phone users rapidly increase, and with open source tools
commonly available, the AR mobile technology will undoubtedly be widely adopted in every aspect of the living
environment. It is hoped the findings of this study might provide a reference for future development of AR mobile
touring systems.

References
Asif, M. & Krogstie, J. (2010). Mobile student information system. Retrieved: 09/01/2011, from: www.emeraldinsight.com/1065-0741.htm.
Azuma, R.T. (1997). A survey of Augmented Reality. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 6 (4), 355-385.
Billinghurst, M. Kato, H., Poupyrev, I. (2001). The MagicBook: A Transitional AR Interface. Computers & Graphics, 745-753.
Boticki, I., Hoic-Bozic, N., and Budiscak, I. (2009). A System Architecture for a Context-aware Blended Mobile Learning Environment. Journal
of Computing and Information Technology, 2, 165–175.
Caudell, T.P. & Mizell, D.W.(1992). Augmented reality: an application of heads-up display technology to manual manufacturing processes.
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Hawaii International Conference, vol.2, pp.659- 669.
Colubmia CGUI Lab (1999). MARS - Mobile Augmented Reality Systems. Retrieved 02/01/2011, from:
http://graphics.cs.columbia.edu/projects/mars/
Columbia University (2010). Columbia Campus Tours on Your Smartphone. Retrieved: 01/04/2011, from:
http://ccnmtl.columbia.edu/news/announcements/mobile-campustour.html.
Educause (2005). 7 things you should know about Augmented Reality. Retrieved: 05/08/2010, from:
http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ELI7007.pdf.
Georgia Tech Atlanta (2009). Augmented Environments Lab. Retrieved: Retrieved: 01/21/2011, from:
http://www.augmentedenvironments.org/lab/research/handheld-ar/arhrrrr/
Höllerer, T. & Feiner, S. (2004). Mobile augmented reality. Telegeoinformatics: location-based computing and services. In: Karimi, H. and
Hammad, A. (eds). Haarlem, The Netherlands: Taylor Francis Books. Chapter 8, 221-256.
Hollerer, T., Feiner, S., Terauchi, T., Rashid, G., Hallaway, D., (1999). Exploring MARS: Developing indoor and outdoor user interfaces to a
mobile augmented reality system. Computers & Graphics 23(6), 779-785.
Jaramillo, G. E., Quiroz, J. E., Cartagena, C. A., Vivares, C. A. & Branch, J. W. (2010). Mobile augmented reality applications in daily
environments. Revista EIA, 14, 125-134.
Kaufmann, H. (2003). Collaborative Augmented Reality in Education. Proceeding of Imagina 2003 Conference. Monte Carlo, Monaco.
Li, S. (2010). 'Augmented Reality' on Smart phones Brings Teaching Down to Earth. Retrieved: 09/01/2011, from:
http://chronicle.com/article/Augmented-Reality-on/65991/.
National Taiwan University (2010)ǶNational Taiwan University iPhone Mobile Navigation SystemǶRetrieved: 01/05/2011, from:
http://www.ntu.edu.tw/about/mapiphone.htm
Purdue University (2009). Uses of the Layar Reality Browser in Education. Retrieved: 01/21/2011, from:
http://purdueetech.wordpress.com/2009/08/18/uses-of-the-layar-reality-browser-in-education/
Shelton, B. & Hedley, N. (2002), Using augmented reality for teaching earth-sun relationships to undergraduate geography students. The First
IEEE International Augmented Reality Toolkit Workshop, Darmstadt, Germany. IEEE Catalog Number: 02EX632 ISBN: 0-7803-7680-3

416

Te-Lien Chou and Lih-Juan ChanLin / Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 46 (2012) 410 – 416

University of Exeter (2010). Augmented Reality Unloking the Hidden Curriculum. Retrieved: 09/01/2011, from:
http://as.exeter.ac.uk/support/educationenhancementprojects/augmentedreality/
University of Wisconsin-Madison division (n.d). University of Wisconsin – Madison Campus Map (United States). Retrieved: 01/21/2011, from:
http://site.layar.com/catalog/university-of-wisconsin-madison-campus-map-united-states/
West Virginia University (2010). Have smart phone, will surf -- WVU on the move with mobile. Retrieved: 01/21/2011, from:
http://wvutoday.wvu.edu/n/2010/4/28/have-smart-phone-will-surf-wvu-on-the-move-with-mobi

