Accelerat ing t he world's research.

Bridging the gap between the digital
and the physical
Areti Damala
Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts
- DIMEA '08

Cite this paper

Downloaded from Academia.edu 

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of t he best relat ed papers 

Bridging t he gap bet ween t he digit al and t he physical: design and evaluat ion of a mobile augm…
Aret i Damala

Exploring t he Affect ive Museum Visit ing Experience: Adapt ive Augment ed Realit y (A2R) and Cult ural H…
Aret i Damala, Isabel M. Rodríguez-Marco, Jorge Escrivá, Tobias Schuchert
Tailoring t he Adapt ive Augment ed Realit y (A2R) Museum Visit : Ident ifying Cult ural Herit age Professio…
Aret i Damala

120

DIMEA 2008

Bridging the Gap between the Digital and the Physical:
Design and Evaluation of a Mobile Augmented Reality
Guide for the Museum Visit
Areti Damala, Pierre Cubaud

Anne Bationo, Pascal Houlier, Isabelle Marchal

CNAM-CEDRIC
Orange Labs
292, rue St Martin, 75003, Paris, France
Cesson-Sévigné, France
{damala, cubaud@cnam.fr}
{anne.bationo, pascal.houlier, isabelle.marchal}@orange-ftgroup.com

ABSTRACT
Can Augmented Reality (AR) techniques inform the design and
implementation of a mobile multimedia guide for the museum
setting? Drawing from our experience both on previous mobile
museum guides projects and in AR technology, we present a fully
functional prototype of an AR-enabled mobile multimedia
museum guide, designed and implemented for the Museum of
Fine Arts in Rennes, France. We report on the life cycle of the
prototype and the methodology employed for the AR approach as
well as on the selected mixed method evaluation process; finally,
the first results emerging from quantitative evaluation are
discussed, supported by evidence and findings from the
qualitative part of the assessment process. We conclude with
lessons learned during the full circle of conception,
implementation, testing and assessment of the guide.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.1 [Multimedia Information Systems]: Artificial, augmented,
and virtual realities. H.5.2 [User interfaces]: ergonomics,
evaluation/methodology, graphical user interfaces, prototyping
theory and methods, user-centered design. J.5 [Arts and
Humanities]: Fine Arts. K.3.1 [Computer and Education]:
Computer-assisted instruction.

General Terms
Performance, Design, Experimentation, Human Factors.

Keywords
Museum handheld devices, mobile augmented
participatory design, evaluation, edutainment

reality,

1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Mobile guides in the museum setting
Museum affinities with new technologies are not recent. Ever
since the World Wide Web boom, museums and other cultural
heritage institutions have been progressively investing not only on
cutting edge documentation and information systems, but also on
multimedia technologies fostering long-lasting relationships with
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
DIMEA’08, September 10–12, 2008, Athens, Greece.
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-248-1/08/09…$5.00.

their visitors. In this context, the transition from analog to digital
audio guides can be considered as one of the new age revolutions
that drastically changed the interpretation media landscape. Yet,
another advent would occur, as an increasing number of cultural
institutions around the globe offer a new alternative to their
visitors: mobile, light weight, multimedia-capable devices that
provide in situ interpretation material, traditionally residing on
diverse media, such as books, audio guides, multimedia kiosks or
even internet web sites, that promise to accompany the visitor
throughout the visit; mobile multimedia museum guides are also
capable of delivering personalized content depending on user
preferences, age or learning abilities with the potential benefit of
limitless multimedia delivery through wireless networks. From
the side of museum professionals, this way of delivering
information presents also advantages, like monitoring visiting
patterns, real time communication with the visitors and linking of
the museum visit with the pre and post-visit phases.

1.2 Physical
Orientation

vs.

Digital

Navigation

and

Ever since the introduction of mobile guides in the museum
setting, several issues have aroused, mainly related with content
authoring, content update and content delivery. However, despite
of the choices made, location awareness positions itself as a
central issue in every mobile museum guide project, while it
qualifies both as a technological and a design challenge. Visitors
using mobile multimedia guides, need constantly not only to
“locate” themselves by navigating in the interactive application
but also in the exhibition’s physical space, in a synchronised
manner, as both actions occur at the same time. Consequently, the
two most susceptible questions museum visitors may pose
themselves when using mobile multimedia museum guides are:
-

Where can I find the object for which I can see there is
relevant content?

Or
-

Where / how can I find information for this particular
exhibition object I just happened to see?

Both of these substantial questions share a common characteristic:
they demand from the visitor to navigate from the digital to the
physical space and vice versa. Simple geolocalization capabilities
in this case are not enough, except if they are combined with 3D
orientation-aware software or hardware.
Despite remarkable advances in mobile applications
geolocalization issues, orientation in indoor spaces remains an
open question. Wi-Fi and Bluetooth have been employed in the
museum context for geolocalization but are inappropriate for

3rd International Conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts

Virtual Exhibitions and Museums

educated guesses about orientation, while RFID and Infrared have
also been tested but mostly in a trigger-like manner for delivering
or bookmarking appropriate multimedia content [17]. In addition,
unlike Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, RFID and Infrared require line of
sight, difficult to achieve in the sometimes heavily crowded
museum spaces. It is therefore not surprising that commercial
solutions employed by museums such as the Tate Modern Gallery
in London [18], the Van Gogh museum in Amsterdam and lately
the Louvre in Paris [13] opted for a more conventional but easy to
implement solution: providing the visitor with a floor plan of the
exhibition space on the mobile museum guide, while physically
annotating commented objects and works of art with an audioguide-like manner. The visitor has to tap on the touch-sensitive
screen the number corresponding to the exposed exhibit. As plans
are not always very easy to decipher and use by a non
experienced visitor, the audio guide-approach seems to follow a
fair, straightforward and coherent conceptual model [15] that is
easy to understand and use in the museum context. In “Mobivisit”
project a declarative geolocalization model was used. The visitor
had to fill in four data base fields and then wait to see the results
of the query [6]. In “DANAE” project, Wi-Fi was used in order to
determine in which part of the exhibition the visitors found
themselves but the appropriate content was only displayed after
the visitors’ explicit demand, confirming that the change of
position was not accidental but intentional [3]. That was not the
case in the Cite des Sciences, “That’s Canada” exhibition. The
environment was dark enough so as to facilitate the infrared
triggering but often enough the visitor could not control the
application. Infrared was also used in the Carrara marble museum
[5] and the Cinema museum in Italy.

1.3 AR for navigation, orientation and
interaction in mobile guides for the museum
setting
A different approach has been employed by researchers in Xerox
PARC, proposing a visual interface composed by photos of
surrounding walls with “hyperlinked” objects indicating that the
visitor can get further information about them [24]. However this
solution was implemented in the less complex environment of an
historic house. In the museum context, a much more
straightforward approach would be to use the mobile guide as a
“magic mirror”, scanning the surrounding environment for
spatially annotated objects; this is exactly one of the promises of
Augmented Reality [2] applications, proposing to augment the
physical space by blending it with virtual information, ranging
from text to image or even 3d characters as recently proposed in
Chrystiegården Oslo, Norway [9].
Cultural heritage has been inspiring the AR community ever since
the last started to be thought also as a medium rather than only as
a new technology. For example the ARCHEOGUIDE [22] and
LIFEPLUS [20] projects have been exploring the use of Mobile
AR in historical and archaeological sites using either head
mounted displays or handheld devices. AR has also appeared in
form of fixed installations in historical sites in Portugal and in
Belgium’s Ename Center [16] helping visitors to visualize how an
actual site might have once looked like. Some museums, like the
Limerick Museum in Ireland [10], have been also experimenting
with mixed and AR installations intramuros. Another possibility
was offered by the ARCO project [23], proposing to museum
curators the creation of virtual replicas of the exposed and non

121

exposed objects. An interesting “virtual” AR scenario was
provided in 2003 by the DinoHunter project of the Senckenberg
paleontological museum in Germany, where young visitors
visiting the museum’s web site could start a (virtual) mystery tour
manipulating a (virtual) PDA that augmented the dinosaurs’
skeletons, reconstituting how they would have been like [19]. One
year earlier, Sparaccino published the “Museum Wearable”. The
augmentation however was provided by means of a video
presentation displayed in front on one of both eyes using standard
infrared location identification sensors [21].

2. PROJECT BACKGROUND
Augmented Reality has the potential to provide an interesting
alternative for navigation, interaction and orientation in the
museum setting as the full surrounding environment can be
transformed in an interaction surface [7]. Tracking and
registration in 3D -both essential components of AR applicationscan be used not only for recalculating the exact position of the
virtual objects that will be inserted, but also for the visitors’
localization and orientation both in the exhibition space and the
AR application. The ideal displays in this case would be either
mobile devices or AR goggles. In this context, the “connect”
project [1] is probably the most relative indoor experimentation
carried out in a museum setting; it set as a goal exploring Mobile
AR in science museums, providing also a comprehensive
framework for the pre and post visit phase. Yet the equipment the
pupils had to wear included a laptop attached to a backpack and a
rather bulky headset, with an overall weight exceeding 5 kilos,
while large markers had to be placed in the museum sites. A
considerably “lighter” solution was proposed by the AR group in
Bauhaus university, Weimar, where mobile phones were tested
for museum guidance together with Bluetooth emitters and neural
network-based computer vision for the identification of museum
objects by means of taking a photo of the desired object [4].
However there was no communication on the full range of
implemented augmentations, neither on assessment of user
experience regarding orientation and navigation in the physical
and digital space by using the guide.
As navigation and orientation in both digital and physical space
remains largely unexplored, particularly in the mobile and
multimedia museum guide context, we undertook the creation of a
first AR mobile museum guide prototype based on a marker based
approach, but one that instead of adding markers in the exhibition
space would rather use the actual museum objects as markers.
This approach does not demand any additional installations in the
museum premises, apart from the visitor terminals, and therefore
qualifies as a both more discrete and less costly solution in terms
of necessary museum infrastructure.
The design process of the very first prototype included the
definition of educational scenarios and a possible functions’ list,
as well as a first pilot application based on a simple, marker-based
approach. Demos were subsequently presented and discussed both
with information technologies specialists and museum
professionals. We then took a step forward, contacting the local
Museum of Fine Arts in Rennes, Brittany, in order to make a
proposal of a common project for the conception and
implementation of an AR enabled mobile multimedia guide that
the museum kindly accepted. Numerous on-site tests were
subsequently conducted in the museum premises in order to verify
to which extent the already used algorithms were effective under

3rd International Conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts

122

DIMEA 2008

the real museum conditions. An initial list of a dozen paintings
was dressed; all of them had characteristics enabling an easy and
accurate tracking that would not risk frustrating museum visitors.
As AR is a relatively new computer scientific discipline, one of
the design challenges was to assist stakeholders with a non
technical background in expressing their needs in terms of AR
based scenarios. We were helped however by the museum’s prior
experience in the FRAME project that resulted in the
development of an interactive internet game for children, “The
Room of Wonders” [12, 14]. As several brainstorming sessions
were organized with the participation of interaction designers,
ergonomists, Virtual and Augmented Reality engineers and
museum curators and educators, progressively, the museum
stakeholders started to feel more at ease regarding the
technologies that would be employed and ready to propose their
own AR scenarios and ideas.
From the museum point of view, the AR approach can provide a
more intuitive and discrete way for interaction with the displayed
objects, while for the AR scientific community, museums provide
contextually rich indoor environments for experimentations with
AR applications, which as opposed with others, are open to a
wide public, of different Information Technologies (IT) skills and
backgrounds. In addition, as AR remains a computer science
discipline with many technical challenges to overcome, an indoor
environment -in our case the museum- is usually much easier to
control and therefore less error prone than an outdoor
environment. Eventually, a successful solution could then be
modified and implanted in many other indoor environments, like
exhibitions or other attractions.

3. DESIGN PROCESS
3.1 Design and content creation in the
museum

An evaluation methodology, favoring a mixed method evaluation
process was also proposed to the museum stakeholders. In order
to prepare the content for authoring in the lab, regular meetings
were held in the museum, at the convenience of the museum
professionals. The primary source of information came from the
physical archive of the museum. This element proved important
for further evolving the visit scenario, as, in many cases, nondigitized documentation material further inspired the creation of
scenarios around the visit in sometimes unexpected ways.

3.2 Design and content creation in the lab
However, the downfall of this approach was that almost all
application content (more than 80%) had to be built from scratch.
That mainly happened in the lab, where “rough” digital material
(including text and illustrations), as well as the visiting scenarios
were transferred for content authoring. The different media
employed were text, audio, video, slideshows as well as 2D and
3D digital overlays in order to create the illusion that elements
and details of the pictured “jumped out” of the paintings (Figure
1c).
The interface design and the overall “look and feel” of the
application were kept simple. A three layer navigation scheme
was employed. At the first level, once a painting was detected,
visitors could navigate in the five defined themes –“description”,
“technique”, iconography”, “context” and “artist”- which were
represented as simple 3D ellipsoid overlays with inlaid text
(Figure 1a-1b). At a second level, once a theme was activated,
familiar media pictograms (Figure 1b-1d) represented the nature
of the available for consultation interpretation material. Finally,
once at the top-down navigation level, visitors could pause,
forward or go back in the 2D and 3D multimedia presentations.

Because of the experimental character of this first, on-field,
intervention, the target group for which the application would be
designed was put forward by all stakeholders from the very
beginning. The museum team suggested that we profile and target
young people, in between 18 and 30 years old, an age group
considered as a critical public for many museums and thought as
presumably more at ease with IT.
Regarding the guide content, four paintings were finally retained,
forming a thematic visit related with the iconography of costumes
and dressing. It was also necessary to agree on the themes that
would be presented in each painting. Museum professionals were
advised at an early stage to try to think of presentation scenarios
consistent with all of the selected paintings. The five themes that
were eventually selected were the following:
-

A “Description” theme, providing a detailed description
of the painting.

-

A “Technique” theme, including the technique
employed as well as restoration interventions.

-

An “Iconography” theme, treating the depicted theme
while highlighting affinities with other paintings.

-

A “Context” theme, gathering information relative with
the artistic and social context of the examined period.

-

An “Artist” theme, containing all relevant artist
information.

Figure 1a-1d: Navigating in a painting’s themes and in
available interpretation media

4. MAIN COMPONENTS OF THE SYSTEM
The evaluation testbed used for the experimentation consisted of
three elements: The mobile AR prototype, a system to record and
later observe users’ actions with the prototype and a system to
observe users’ behavior during the evaluation sessions.
The AR prototype was executed on an Ultra Mobile PC (UMPC)
Samsung Q1 running on Windows XP and equipped with an
ordinary webcam (Figure 2a, 2d). The AR system is powered by
the MAGIC Engine software framework (“Mobile Augmented
Reality for Indoor Collections”), built on top of OpenCV for
video acquisition, ARToolkitPlus for tracking the paintings,
OGRE3D for the insertion of the virtual objects, Open AL for the

3rd International Conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts

Virtual Exhibitions and Museums

audio output and XERCES for xml document parsing. During the
visit, the visitor holds the AR prototype system in such a way that
the attached webcam (Figure 2d) is directed towards the paintings.
The captured video is displayed in real time on the screen of the
UMPC (Figure 2c), augmented with 2D or 3D virtual objects
(Figure 1a-1d) with an observed frame rate of about 15
frames/second. The user can access these objects interactively
either by using the UMPC buttons or the touch-sensitive screen
thus giving access to other digital documents (text, audio, video,
2D and 3D graphics), arranged in a tree structure as described in
section 3.2. Provided that the painting is entirely visible on the
screen, the system is robust enough to entirely support the
augmented visit and all of the available presentations.

123

to be designed carefully and had to include research questions that
would also arouse in the evaluation of a non AR mobile museum
guide. For the same reason, employing qualitative methods, such
as the direct observation of the visitors interacting both with the
paintings and the mobile guide was judged necessary as well as
conducting a semi-structured interview right after the visit. The
post visit protocol would also include a survey and two
workshops to which consenting students would participate. At the
same time, the exploratory nature of the study as well as the
protocol retained, favored a sample consisting from about 10 to a
maximum of 16 museum visitors. Twelve participants were
finally recruited from two different local university faculties, the
School of Fine Arts and the Department of Social Sciences. This
profiling further refined the age profile of our sample from 18 to
30 to 18 to 22 years old. Unlike many other AR user-based
studies, an equal representation of male and female participants
was achieved.

5.2 Before and during the visit
In the time span of approximately two weeks, 12 visitors were
observed, interviewed and video recorded (Figure 3a-3d). After
meeting the research team and following a short tutorial, the
necessary additional equipment -the head camera and the belt bag
containing the ARCHOS player- was appropriately adjusted.

Figures 2a-2d: The equipment used for the experimentations.
The belt bag (2b) contains the multimedia recorder (2c)
A digital video camcorder on a tripod centering the whole scene
was used so as to record and further analyze users’ interaction
with the AR system, the painting and the museum space (Figure
3b). Finally, in order to capture in detail the interaction of the
users with the AR prototype, an ARCHOS 404 multimedia
recorder (Figure 2c) placed on a belt bag (Figure 2b) was used,
equipped with a mini cam attached on a headband strap (Figure
3c). Because of this additional equipment that had to be adjusted
on the participants, the design choice made regarding the audio
was to use the UMPC speakers and not a headset for the audio
delivery.

Despite the fact that all sessions were recorded both by the video
camera as well as by the ARCHOS recorder, all participants were
also observed throughout the full visit by one of the researchers
(Figure 3b). The first task visitors were asked to perform was to
locate the works for which further resources were available. Once
the painting was detected, the visitors were asked to freely
navigate in the content according to their preferences and
preferably exactly as they would do if they were alone. The
duration of the visits ranged between 25 and 60 minutes according
to visitors particular interests. A 15-minute interview then
followed. The first interview questions helped as a warm-up and
included general questions regarding museum visiting while the
second part focused more on their visitors’ impressions while
using the guide. Interviews were also very helpful in reshaping
the issues that would be later treated during the focus group
sessions.

5. ASSESSMENT OF THE AR GUIDE
5.1 Methodological considerations regarding
the evaluation process
The evaluation of the mobile AR guide had many inherent
difficulties. The first one is related with a major issue observed in
the field of AR, where user studies are still clearly underutilized.
Gabbard and Swan report that in a total of 1,104 articles on AR
recessed, only 2% included a user based study [11]. This creates
an enormous hiatus in between AR as a computer science
discipline informed by a continuous progress in engineering, and
AR as an emerging technology that has a potentially tremendous
impact not only on the way we interact with computers but also
with our environment and with each other.
The second difficulty, and one more challenging, was relevant
with the assessment of the AR interface, as our target group was
neither familiar with the notion of AR nor had ever used other
mobile multimedia guides. Therefore, the evaluation protocol had

Figure 3a-3d: Observing the user experience and positioning
of the main actors (3b)

3rd International Conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts

124

DIMEA 2008

5.3 After the visit
A few days before the focus group sessions, the survey was
posted on the web and participants were reminded to fill it in, if
possible before our second meeting. The questionnaire was
composed by 45 questions divided roughly in 5 parts and took
approximately 5 to 10 minutes to fill in. The questionnaire
sections largely reflect the presentation of the results in sections
6.2 to 6.5.
The last phase of the experimentations, the two workshops, took
place one and a half month after the museum visits. Both focus
group sessions were video recorded. Because of the limited time
available (approximately an hour and a half) the discussion had to
be moderated so as include some of the major issues that had been
observed or discussed during the interviews, like the implications
resulting from the multimedia nature of the guide, users’
navigation in both the museum and the application, and the
simultaneous interaction with the guide, the painting and the
museum space. Students were encouraged to express all the
positive or negative feelings this mediated visit provoked (Figure
4a-4d).

Figure 4a-4d: The focus group sessions; attributes of an ideal
guide provided by the participants (4d)
Shortly before leaving the room, all participants were asked to
write on sticky notes one or more of the characteristics they
would like the ideal guide to include or not, creating a collage that
provided spontaneous and interesting in nature feedback (Figure
4d).

6. ACCEPTANCE OF THE AR GUIDE
6.1 Methodological considerations
In order to test the usability and acceptance of the AR guide, it
was sometimes necessary to use more than one way in
formulating the questions. For this part of the study, we opted –
when judged essential- for a psychometric, summative, Likertlike, 4-point scale. The 4-point scaled was preferred over a 5point, as the 5-point scale -which includes a neutrality statementmay create confusion between the statements “I am neutral” or “I
don’t have an opinion”. Therefore, our scale consisted of the
“Mostly Agree” statement, followed by the “Somewhat Agree”,
“Somewhat Disagree” and “Mostly Disagree” statements that
during the analysis were attributed a 1 to 4 score. Attention was

given in alternating the positively and negatively worded
statements, in order to control the “acquiescence” effect.

6.2 Participants and New Technologies
All participants own a mobile phone that they obtained from the
age of 15/16 years old. Despite the fact that the majority stated
using a PC every day, there is a slight gender cap, with males
using more often a PC in their everyday life in comparison with
female participants. As Augmented Reality is a relatively newly
coined term, the term “Virtual Reality” was used as a reference
point, during the presentation of the study, mainly as a mean of
comparison with “Augmented Reality”. However, the answers of
the participants turned out to put in question our assumption, as
more than half stated not having heard of the term “Virtual
Reality” before. Less surprisingly, all participants were certain
that they had never heard the term “Augmented Reality” before.

6.3 Participants and museum visiting
Inspecting the relation of participants with museum visiting was
equally import, in order to examine whether already established
visiting patterns or habits are related with user acceptance of the
mobile museum guide. The answers in this section, validated the
initial assumption that our target group rather belonged to the
category of the “frequent museum goers”, as almost 58.3% of the
sample claimed visiting museums four or more times per year; it
is worth noticing however that this result is influenced by the
answers of the students in Fine Arts, who stated visiting museums
very often in their totality, as compared with a corresponding
16.7% of the second group. As many visitor studies report that
visiting a museum is also a social experience [8], participants
were also asked whether they prefer visiting museums alone, with
friends/family, or in a group. This assumption was found to be
more coherent with the students of the Social Sciences, two thirds
of whom answered that they prefer visiting with family or friends,
compared to the other group where five out of the six participants
stated that they prefer visiting alone. Of course the results
obtained in these last questions do not imply that one or the other
group is more social in nature but rather that one of the two
groups maybe frequents museums more often because of the
specific nature of the undertaken studies.
A strong polarity was observed in the answers given as to whether
participants generally use or not interpretation material
throughout the visit; only half of the participants answered that
they always do so. The answers were equally divided both
between the two university groups as well as in between male and
female. However all participants chose to fill in the question
regarding the interpretation material they are more susceptible to
use. As to the nature of the interpretation material used, text
provided by the museum comes in 1st place with 60%, followed
by on site multimedia kiosks, museum web sites and printed
guides of a museum’s collection (20%), and finally audio guides
(10%). No student opted for the guided visit answer.

6.4 Usability and content effectiveness of the
AR guide
6.4.1 Ease of use and navigation
Interestingly, the best score obtained in this section was related
with the ease of spatial identification and localization of the
commented works of art in the gallery space (mean=3.4), obtained
by a 58.3% of the participants that strongly agreed, with the

3rd International Conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts

Virtual Exhibitions and Museums

remaining 41.7% mostly agreeing. Good scores were also
obtained regarding the easiness of navigation (mean=3.25). A
somewhat lower score was obtained when participants were asked
to judge the overall easiness of use of the guide (mean=3.08); we
believe however that the additional equipment used for the study,
might have somewhat influenced the obtained score. The lowest
score in this section was observed in the statement regarding
whether the “augmentation” of the true objects with virtual ones
facilitated the access to the content. Despite the fact that this
question is strongly linked with the much better performing
assertions of the two first questions, the mean obtained was only
2.25, with participants equally divided in between the “strongly
agree”, “somewhat agree” and “somewhat disagree” statements.
This is a good example of the importance in the formulation of the
research questions and the impact this can have in the results and
findings of surveys.

6.4.2 Content Effectiveness
The question regarding the intuitive comprehension of the
included thematic axes, ranked 1st in this section with a score of
3.5. Next followed the quality of the audio recordings together
with the quality of the multimedia presentations (mean=3.16). A
polarity was observed in the question regarding the length of the
audio comments, which in most cases exceeded the standard 1.30
minute audio guide comment: half of the participants found the
audio recordings to be too long and the other half satisfactory.
This second group is mainly composed by male students and
Social Sciences students. Unanimity is observed as to the length
of the provided texts and multimedia presentations with 91.7% of
the participants judging them satisfactory. Another interesting
question was relevant with the ways participants used the
multimedia guide and its content. Despite the fact that all the
media provided were eventually used by the students, the audio
content as well as the reference 2D and 3D images came in top
with 66.7%, followed by the texts (41.7%), the 2D or 3D
multimedia presentations (33%) and the video (25%).

6.5 Attentional balance and post visit effects
The last part of the questionnaire was composed of statements
regarding the interplay between the museum object and the guide
as well as some questions regarding the post visit effect.
Participants were asked whether the reference images used for the
multimedia presentations in 2D or 3D interfered with their
appropriation of the painting contemplated or helped them better
approach the painting, having as a third possibility to give their
own answer. Half of them answered that they were helped, while
the other half was equally divided between the “interference”
choice and the open ended answer, to which all implicated
participants answered that they were sometimes helped and some
other not.
The next arduous question demanded from participants to position
themselves on the negatively worded statement of interference of
the guide with their contemplation of a work of art. Opinions were
also divided, with 25% of the participants choosing the “mostly
agree” option, 33.3% the “somewhat agree” option, 33.3% the
“somewhat disagree” option and 8.3% the “mostly disagree”
option, giving an average score of 2.25. However further analysis
indicated that frequent museum goers, felt more distracted (score
3.4) in comparison with participants visiting museum less often,
who felt much less distracted by the use of the guide (score 1.8).
Also, students using a PC very often marked in a more

125

pronounced way their distraction from the real work of art (3.0
versus 2.25 for the rest of the participants) as well as male in
comparison with female (2.2 versus 3.3) . The statement asking
participants whether they found the use of the guide playful
provoked less division, achieving one of the best scores of the
survey (3.5) with all participants either mostly or somewhat
agreeing. It is also interesting to check the answers on the
statement “Using the guide helped me better approach and
appreciate the paintings”, where 91.7% mostly or somewhat
agreed with the remaining 8.33% somewhat disagreeing (score:
3.1). The same results were also obtained when participants were
asked whether they think having learned more using the guide
rather than if they hadn’t used it at all.
We were also interested in including some questions regarding the
post visit effect, like for example the number of works included in
the guide. Almost six weeks after the visit, 75% of the
participants were able to remember correctly. However even
participants who didn’t remember correctly could name one or
more of the subjects depicted and/or the artists represented.
Despite the altercation in the responses of several of the questions
of the survey, all participants answered that they would use a
similar guide of it was available in a museum; 44%
unconditionally, and 64 % adding some personal criteria ( “yes, if
I was alone”, “yes, but according to the featured exhibition”,
“certainly, if it was free of charge”).

6.6 Lessons learned during the field study
It would be useful to highlight some of the main interesting points
of the field study as they provide additional key points susceptible
to have a positive or negative impact on these first –quantitative
in nature- results.
The first important remark concerns the surrounding
environmental conditions during the guided visits of the
participants. The affluence of many school visits, observed
principally during the morning testing sessions, sometimes
deprived participants of choosing their own itinerary towards the
one suggested by the researchers, waiting for the galleries to get
calmer. For the same reason, audio, delivered by means of the
UMPC integrated speakers, was sometimes hard to hear. Visitors’
opinion against this deficiency found its way to us, despite the
fact that there was no particular question on the survey: the
problem was reported during the interviews and was included in
some of the survey answers.
Another crucial remark is that visitors demanded even more
consistency regarding the multimedia presentations. This was
discovered by means of an intentional inconsistency regarding
whether the included in the multimedia presentation texts were
transcripts of the audio content or not. All of the participants that
happened to first discover that the text was the same with the
audio they had previously listened, made the reasonable
assumption that whenever a text and an audio comment were both
included, they revealed the same information.
In terms of content presentation many participants indicated that
the somewhat more playful presentation approach employed in
one of the four paintings appealed a lot to them. It is of course not
by a hazard that this particular painting benefited by the direct
input of the museum educators. As far as the adaptation in
maneuvering the application is concerned, it soon became obvious
that stressed visitors, particularly those that considered themselves

3rd International Conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts

126

DIMEA 2008

not having a “considerable” ease in using such a guide, usually
needed more adaptation time than the more confident -regarding
IT- students, usually not exceeding a couple of minutes. This
initial difficulty did not influence in a negative way the
participants as it was this last group that found considerably more
rewarding the use of the guide.

7. DISCUSSION
Clearly, some of the findings of the survey need further
discussion. For example, it turned out that despite common
assumptions about museum visiting as a primarily social activity,
in our sample, a strong proportion of participants visit museums
alone. Another polarity observed was that interpretation material
is not consistently used during museum visiting, but when this is
the case, the students use interpretation means coming from the
full spectrum of available material, with museum provided texts
coming first, though other interpretation media, like multimedia
kiosks, audio guides, web sites or books are also used during or
following the visit. These remarks, suggest that even within a
stratified sample like ours, the need for personalization of the
multimedia application according to different profiles is more
than a necessity.
Concerning the use of the Augmented Reality approach the results
are very encouraging. All of the participants indicated either a
moderate or a strong positive attitude as to whether the
identification of the commented works was an easy task. The
same holds true regarding the ease of navigation in the
application, based consistently on the Augmented Reality
metaphor, at all levels of information retrieval. It is characteristic
that one of the visitors mentioned, both during the interview as
well as during the focus group, that the detection was far too easy
and that a more “difficult” or playful way of discovery should
maybe be present. As to whether the guide and the reference
multimedia material provided interfered with visitors’ own
appropriation of the work of art, frequent museum goers as well
as those of the participants using a PC very often -meaning at
least daily for the needs of our survey- indicated being more
distracted than the rest of the participants. The slight gap between
male and female is here reversed in comparison with the
frequency with which participants use new technologies, as
female participants indicated being distracted much less
(mean=2.2) than male participants (mean=3.3). These findings
could indicate that whenever there is a well established pattern of
interaction, being it with a PC or a museum object, one is more
hesitant in adapting a new, alternative strategy of apprehension
and communication. But the positive side of this remark is that it
seems probable that new audiences could be attracted in the
museum premises if a variety of interpretation means was to be
provided. Additional evidence pointing towards this direction is
that despite the fact that half of the visitors indicated using textual
information when visiting museums over other interpretation
media, the predominant use of text over other media is not at all
reflected in the answer presented in section 6.4.2, where visitors
were invited to explain how they used the multimedia guide. This
finding is quite significant as it could indicate that whenever and
wherever alternative material is proposed it does not risk not to be
appropriated by museum visitors.

8. PERSPECTIVES
Despite the fact that mobile museum guides are sometimes
suspected for distracting visitors’ attention, our study proved that
visitors were very careful as to what they saw and listened while
using the mobile museum guide. It also became apparent that
using alternative interpretation media might have the potential of
attracting new publics. The non-familiarity with IT applications
proved not to be a drawback in the overall appreciation of the AR
assisted mobile guide. Additionally, visitors strongly expressed
themselves putting in question aspects of the overall design, like
for example the design choice concerning the audio delivery.
Another important finding of the full experimentation was that
despite the fact that constant cross disciplinary collaboration can
considerably stretch the time needed for the design and
implementation phases, it was principally the mostly benefited
from this approach content that came first in the list of visitors’
preferences.
However it seems that the most important finding is that AR
assisted interfaces can indeed successfully facilitate visitors
intuitively switch their focus and attention from the physical to
the digital space and vice versa, even in the complex context of
the museum space. Apart the results of the survey, the direct
observation of the visitors proved the AR interface not only to be
intuitive but also accompanied by a fast learning curve, even
though none of the participants had either used a mobile museum
guide before or a UMPC. Another important element is that the
solution proposed is discrete and non-invasive regarding the
museum ecology, as apart from visitors’ terminals, no other
particular equipment or IT infrastructure is needed in the museum
premises for a successful navigation, orientation and interaction
both with the physical and the digital environment. These findings
get even more encouraging as the sample consisted by
participants who did not have prior experience or knowledge on
AR and AR applications.
Future work includes the full analysis and formalization of the
qualitative part of the research, in order to extract the most
regarding the enhancements that can be brought to a new
prototype and address all elements that might favor or slow down
the acceptance of mobile AR enabled multimedia applications.
Based on a detailed analysis of all results, a new prototype will
also be implemented and tested in the same context, with the
ambition to come closer to a guide which should ideally be
“playful”, “accessible for a larger public”, “original”,
“motivating” “interactive”, “curious”, “surprising”, but also
“subjective” and “sensitive”, some only of the adjectives
attributed by the participants during the focus group sessions.
With the continuous advent in computer processing power and
size, the intrusion of mobile technologies in all aspects of our
everyday life, and the constant evolution of AR technologies, it
seems probable that in the maybe not so distant future, museum
visitors might have the possibility to enjoy a rich multimedia but
also emotional experience, using their self-owned mobile, ARenabled devices, providing thus museums educators and curators
with an alternative method of delivering rich and diverse exhibitrelated, in situ, interpretation material.

9. AKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Our thanks go to all the personnel of the Museum of Fine Arts in
Rennes for their sincere engagement in all stages of the project.

3rd International Conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts

Virtual Exhibitions and Museums

We would particularly like to thank Laurence Imbernon, our
corresponding museum curator in the Museum of Fine Arts in
Rennes, as well as the inspiring team of museum educators.
Finally, we would like to thank Charlotte, Marine, Marlene,
Marie-Laure, Elise, Florence, Florian, Benjamin, Benjamin L.,
Julien, Simon and Johan for their enthusiastic participation in all
stages of this long evaluation process.
The experimentations benefited from the France Telecom
Research and Development PhD internship program, while the
data mining and analysis of the results were conducted in
CEDRIC, Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers, Paris,
France.

[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]

10. REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

Anastopoulou, S. and Sotiriou, S. (eds.). Connect:
Designing the Classroom of Tomorrow by using
Advanced Technnologies to connect formal and
informal learning environments. Implementation Guide.
Epinoia S.A, Athens, Greece, 2005.
Azuma, R., A Survey of Augmented Reality. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments,6 (4), 355-385
Brelot, M., Cotarmanach, A., Damala, A. and
Kockelcorn, H., Nomadic computing in indoor cultural
settings: Intelligent connectivity, context awareness and
the mobile museum experience. In Proceedings of
International Cultural Heritage Informatics Meeting
2005, (Paris, 2005), Archives and Museum Informatics
Europe.
Bruns, E., Brombach, B., Zeidler, T., Bimber, O.,
Enabling Mobile Phones to Support Large Scale
Museum Guidance, in IEEE Multimedia 14, 2, 16-25.
Ciavarella, C. and Paternò, F. The design of a handheld,
location aware guide for indoor environments. Pers.
Ubiquit. Comput. 8. 82-91. DOI=
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1152215.1152256
Damala, A., Le Coq, C. and Bouguet, S., Mobivisit: A
field study in the Museum of Fine Arts, Lyon. In
Proceedings of International Cultural Heritage
Informatics Meeting 2005, (Paris, 2005), Archives and
Museum Informatics Europe.
Damala, A., Marchal, I. and Houlier, P., Merging
Augmented Reality Based Features in Mobile
Multimedia Museum Guides. In CIPA 2007,
Anticipating the Future of the Cultural Past, (Athens,
Greece, 2007), ICOMOS, 259-264.
Dierking, L., Falkon, J., The museum experience,
Whalesback books, Washington, 1992
Dimmen, P., Ny virkelighet gjennom avanserte briller,
Computerworld (PC World Norway), February 22 2007.
Ferris, K., Bannon, L., Ciolfi, L., Gallagher, P., Hall, T.
and Lennon, M. Shaping experiences in the Hunt
museum: a design case study. In Proceedings of the
2004 conference on Designing Interactive Systems:
Processes, Practices, Methods, and Techniques
(Cambridge, MA, USA, August 01 - 04, 2004). DIS '04.
ACM, New York, NY, 205-214. DOI=
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1013115.1013144
Gabbard, J., Swan. E., Usability Engineering for
Augmented Reality: Employing User-Based Studies to

[17]

[18]

127

Inform Design. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 14, 3 (May-June 2008), 513-525
http://www.framemuseums.org/sites/room of
wonders/index
Louvre. Le guide multimédia du museé de Louvre,
Présentation à la presse, 12 février 2008, Paris, 2008.
Moonan, W. Where in the World is that Exotic Roof
Ornament? The New York Times, New York, August 17
2007.
Norman, D. The Design of Future Things. Basic Books,
New York, 2007.
Owen, R., Buhalis, D. and Pletinckx, D., Visitors㺰
Evaluations of ICTs Used in Cultural Heritage. In VAST
2005, The 6th International Symposium on Virtual
Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural Heritage,
(Pisa, Italy, 2005), Eurographics Association, 129-137.
Proctor, N., Off base or On Target? Pros and Cons of
wireless and location aware applications in the
museums. In Proceedings of International Cultural
Heritage Informatics Meeting, (Paris, 2005), Archives
and Museum Informatics Europe.
Proctor, N. and Burton, J., Tate Modern Multimedia
Tour Pilots 2002-2003. In M Learn 2003: Learning

with mobile devices (UK, London, 2003), 54-55.
[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

Sauer, S. and Goebel, S., Dinohunter: Game based learn
experience in Museums. In Proceedings of International
Cultural Heritage Informatics Meeting 2003, (Paris,
2003), Archives and Museum Informatics Europe.
Sforza, F., Scagliarini, D., Coralini, A., Vecchietti, E.,
Cinotti, T.S., Roffia, L., Galasso, S., Malavasi, M.,
Pigozzi, M. and Romagnoli, E. Exciting understanding
in Pompeii through on-site parallel interaction with dual
time virtual models. In Proceedings of the 2001
conference on Virtual Reality, Archeology, and Cultural
Heritage, ACM Press, 2001, 83-90.
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/584993.585007
Sparacino, F., The Museum Wearable: real-time sensordriven understanding of visitors㺰 interests for
personalized visually-augmented museum experiences.
in Museums and the Web 2002, (Boston, USA, 2002),
Archives and Museum Informatics.
Vlahakis, V., Demiris, A., Bounos, E. and Ioannidis, N.,
A novel approach to context sensitive guided e-tours in
Cultural sites: Light augmented reality on PDA's. In
VAST 2004, 5th International Symposium on Virtual
Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural Heritage,
(Bruxelles, 2004), 57-66.
White, M., Liarokapsis, F., Darcy, J., Mourkoussis, N.,
Petridis, P. and Lister, P.F., Augmented Reality for
Museum Artefact Visualization. In Proceedings of the
4th Irish Workshop on Computer Graphics,
Eurographics Ireland Chapter, (Coleraine, Northern
Ireland, 2003), 75-80.
Woodruff, A., Aoki, M.P., Hurst, A. and Szymanski,
M.H., Electronic Guidebooks and Visitor Attention. In
International Cultural Heritage Informatics Meeting
2001, (Milano, Italy, 2001), Archives and Museum
Informatics Europe, 437-452.

3rd International Conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts

