Antoniou, A., Katifori, A., Roussou, M., Vayanou, M., Karvounis,
M., Kyriakidi, M. and Pujol-Tost, L. (2016) Capturing the Visitor Profile
for a Personalized Mobile Museum Experience: an Indirect Approach. In:
24th ACM Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalisation
(UMAP 2016), Workshop on Human Aspects in Adaptive and Personalized
Interactive Environments (HAAPIE), Halifax, Canada, 13-17 July 2016
This is the author’s final accepted version.
There may be differences between this version and the published version.
You are advised to consult the publisher’s version if you wish to cite from
it.
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/143234/

Deposited on: 29 June 2017

Enlighten – Research publications by members of the University of Glasgow
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk33640

Capturing the Visitor Profile for a Personalized Mobile
Museum Experience: an Indirect Approach
Angeliki Antoniou
University of Peloponnese
Terma Karaiskaki 22100
Tripolis, Greece
+302710372264

angelant@uop.gr

Akrivi Katifori, Maria Roussou,
Maria Vayanou,
Manolis Karvounis, Marialena
Kyriakidi
University of Athens
Panepistimioupoli, Department of
Informatics and Telecommunications,
15784 Ilisia, Greece

Laia Pujol-Tost
Pompeu Fabra University
Department of Humanities
Barcelona, Spain

pujol.laia@gmail.com

vivi@mm.di.uoa.gr, {mroussou,
vayanou, manosk,
marilou}@di.uoa.gr
ABSTRACT
An increasing number of museums and cultural institutions
around the world use personalized, mostly mobile, museum
guides to enhance visitor experiences. However since a typical
museum visit may last a few minutes and visitors might only visit
once, the personalization processes need to be quick and efficient,
ensuring the engagement of the visitor. In this paper we
investigate the use of indirect profiling methods through a visitor
quiz, in order to provide the visitor with specific museum content.
Building on our experience of a first study aimed at the design,
implementation and user testing of a short quiz version at the
Acropolis Museum, a second parallel study was devised. This
paper introduces this research, which collected and analyzed data
from two environments: the Acropolis Museum and social media
(i.e. Facebook). Key profiling issues are identified, results are
presented, and guidelines towards a generalized approach for the
profiling needs of cultural institutions are discussed.

CCS Concepts
• Human-Centered
computing➝	  HCI
evaluation➝ user models and user studies

design

and

Keywords
Personalization, user modeling, profiling, mobile systems

1. PERSONALIZED APPLICATIONS
Personalized museum applications are becoming increasingly
popular [1] as a means to approach the vast amounts of available
digital information. Especially with regards to museums and
museum learning, personalized applications can be a valuable tool
[2], since they can adapt to a diverse audience’s needs. An
increasing number of museums and cultural institutions around
the world use personalized, mostly mobile, museum guides to
enhance visitors’ experiences [3], attract new visitors [4], and
address the needs of a diverse audience [5].
In addition, personalized applications in cultural heritage seem to
be preferred by the visitors [6]. There are adaptive applications for
different target groups in museums [7]. In addition, there is a wide
range of mobile and space sensitive devices that provide
personalized content [8]. Recent developments include the use of
social media in personalization processes and popular media, like
YouTube and Pinterest [9], Instagram [10], Twitter [11] and
Facebook [12], which are used to create and evaluate personalized

cultural heritage content. Even social media games have been
adopted to extract user profiles for future museum visits [13], and
visitors have been asked to create recommendations for their
friends and loved ones [14]. Ardisonno et al. [15] provide a
detailed survey of the field of personalized applications in cultural
heritage.
Personalization is based on the assumption that the application
can understand the user’s needs, to provide the most relevant and
interesting context, and its success relies greatly on the successful
elicitation of the user profile. In a typical museum visit, in some
cases carried out in the context of a city site-seeing tour, visitors’
time is limited. It may last as little as a few minutes [16], and
visitors might only visit the cultural site once. In this context,
applying a user profiling method that will engage the user into
providing the relevant profiling information may in fact decide the
success or failure of the museum experience.
Thus, visitor-profiling processes need to be quick and efficient;
but the main question is how to start. The problem of “cold start”
is well recognized in the literature, and still a state-of-the-art
topic. Indicatively, [17] used various heuristic techniques and
algorithms to tackle the problem. In another approach, [18] used
reading experts and probability-based algorithms to enhance a
personalized news recommendation system. The user profile
initialization is also an important aspect for personalized museum
applications and a particularly challenging problem to tackle [19].
Thus, in the field of cultural heritage there have also been efforts
to minimize the problems of personalization initialization with the
use of ‘personas’ [20].
The different approaches to the “cold start” problem can be
distinguished as either explicit, meaning that the visitor is aware
of the process, or implicit, meaning that the visitor is not aware of
the process (e.g. [21]). Explicit approaches can be split into two
categories: direct and indirect. Asking directly the user about her
specific museum interests and where she would like to go next is
an example of a direct approach; so is asking the visitor to set her
own profile through questionnaires. However, visitors seem to not
be so keen on direct interrogation or form-filling activities [1].
Indirect explicit approaches also ask the user questions, but these
are only indirectly related to the museum content [22]. Moreover,
if carefully designed, they may inject an element of excitement,
and therefore increase positive involvement in the profiling
process.

Implicit approaches include methods like the one described in
[22], where visitors were asked to customize avatars,
hypothesizing that this process might reflect individual traits. On
the other hand, the PIL (Personal experience with active cultural
heritage – IsraeL) project uses information previously gathered
from the user’s interaction with a webpage, collecting information
prior to the visit [19]. Finally, visitors’ pattern of movement in the
museum is another way to gather valuable information, since
research shows a correlation between physical movement and
cognitive needs [21].
In this paper, we investigate the use of indirect profiling methods
in museum-personalized visits, in order to adapt the museum
content according to the different visitor profiles. Research was
conducted in the context of the EU-funded project (Project name
removed for anonymity purposes), which developed a system
aimed at enriching museum visiting through adaptive personalized
interactive storytelling. The application contained several levels of
personalization, from initial selection of the most appropriate
story given visitors’ interests, visiting style and available time, to
real-time adaptation of the initial plot depending on visitors’
actions in relation to exhibits, the story or the museum space. A
short questionnaire or quiz, the (project name removed) Visitor
Questionnaire (CVQ), was designed to initially identify the users’
characteristics, preferences, and visiting context, as a basis for
early personalization and subsequent adaptation. Yet, in order to
enhance enjoyment and surprise, it was designed as part of the
visit. Since the quiz is the first step in a personalized museum
experience, its design and implementation should be tailored not
only to the needs of a particular museum, but also to particular
mobile storytelling experiences. Moreover, it is also part of the
authoring process and therefore museum professionals should be
able to create and update it.
The research presented in this paper was conducted at the
Acropolis Museum of Athens, as part of a multi-phased
investigation about personalization. The design of the CVQ
started with an initial pilot study, described briefly below. Based
on its results, two stories were authored, the application was
implemented, and its overall performance was tested during the
summative evaluation of the (project name removed) experience.
A parallel study, which is the focus of this paper, explored further
some of the previous results, by assessing two different, albeit
complementary, approaches to quiz design: the first involved
visitors’ various art preferences in the cultural setting; the second
was conducted through on-line quizzes distributed in social
media. Our approach also adopted elements from the available
past research in the area of implicit user profiling methods.
Although the ultimate goal of the present study was the design of
an effective profile initialization method for (project name
removed), its conclusions can be applied to any museum mobile
application employing personalization.

2. THE CVQ PILOT STUDY
We initially explored whether certain film and reading preferences
could be indirectly linked to museum preferences, and in
particular to specific stories. Stories, in this setting, are coherent
narrations by fictional characters (e.g the mythical hero Theseus
or a woman from Archaic Athens), which evolve around the
exhibits. Two stories with specifically designed characteristics
were created, and 10 people were asked to choose one of the two.
Participants were also asked to specify their reading preferences
(possible
answers:
literature/fiction,
non-fiction,
newspapers/magazines, comics/graphic novels) and their film/TV
preferences (possible answers: science/technology programs,

history documentaries, cooking, drama/comedy, sci-fi/ fantasy).
The motivation behind these choices given to the participants is
the fact that preferences like these (i.e. film and book
preferences), are usually indicated by users in different social
media. If our hypotheses were supported these would imply that
social media user profiles could be directly linked to specific
museum narrations (i.e. specific style of language). All
participants were selected amongst both staff and graduate
students
of
the
Department
of
Informatics
and
Telecommunications of the University of Athens (Greece). 5 were
male and 5 were female, with ages ranging from 20 to 39 years
old. The responses to each question were given weights, adding
up to a total relevance score for each user, which was then
compared to the score assigned to each of the two stories. The
results of this initial study indicated that specific film and reading
preferences could be indeed linked to a certain story.
Following this short pilot study, the quiz application was designed
and implemented. The CVQ was conceived as a configurable web
application that enables visitors to reveal their preferences to the
system, by answering a series of multiple-choice questions. The
system is generic and can be used to implement any quiz,
provided it uses the constructs supported (single choice, multiple
choice and ranking questions) and any of the presentation formats
supported (textual, visual, single/multiple column layout, etc.). It
also supports a flexible model for mapping the answers to
personalization variables. The quiz logic is based on an abstract
quiz description, which is accompanied by assets that control the
presentation, namely images, style sheets and templates. The full
specification of how answers map to variables is expressed
through an XML representation. The application is able to present
the quiz, collect the results, and generate the visitor variables
necessary for content personalization. It is built with an industry
standard approach, using JAVE2EE technology, and implemented
in JBOSS Java Beans and the Google Web Toolkit framework
(http://www.gwtproject.org/). This allows the quiz to be created,
edited, and adjusted dynamically, according to each museum
needs and delivery platforms (e.g., web, tablet, smartphone). An
overview of the personalization approach implemented in the
(project name removed) system may be found in (removed for
anonymity purposes).
The CVQ has two versions, one for adults and one for children.
Both include two initial questions about age and gender.
Subsequently, adults are offered the possibility to choose their
favorite film type (superhero, romantic, war, myths, or animal
film) and newspaper section (“politics and economy”, “sports”,
“society and everyday life”, or “comics”). The children’s version
asks about their preferred activities (choice from: “horse riding”,
“karate”, “basketball”, and “cooking”), and preferred kind of
character (choice from: “Gods, warriors and heroes”, “Everyday
people”, “Men of sports”, and “Animals and monsters”). The quiz
can be found at http://chess.madgik.di.uoa.gr:10005/cvsacropolis/.
In parallel, two new stories matching visitors’ traits and
film/reading preferences were created through an iterative coauthoring process involving several specialists. The stories were
based on the characteristics of 2 personas (there were 6 personas
in total) that had been previously identified at the Acropolis
museum [20]:
Theseus: “Theseus, the famous hero of Athens needs your help to
build an army after exiting the Cretan labyrinth! Join him in an
exciting adventure to get all sorts of human, animal and divine
aides!”

Melesso: “Melesso, a noble Athenian woman, talks about her life
in the city of Athens. She has many things to say! Join her journey
of memories, choose the ones you want her to share with you, and
learn about the historical events that affected her life.”
In the story of Theseus, the visitor interacts mostly with its main
character in a quest to find different potential fighters that are
represented by the exhibits (e.g. statues of Hercules or the Rampin
horse rider). The visitor must decide whether a particular fighter
should join the fictional team in aiding Theseus. In the process,
the visitor “meets” other characters and hears stories about Greek
mythology, war, or sports.
The second story is different on several levels. Melesso is the sole
character and describes life in ancient Athens. The story is less
explorative, but much longer, with many branches and
opportunities for personalization. It covers different topics,
including love and marriage, women’s life, the Acropolis temples,
religion, historical events, etc.
The CVQ was tested with these two stories during a two-day
summative usability and user experience evaluation at the
Acropolis Museum. 28 visitors (16 male and 12 female), all of
ethnic Greek background, with ages ranging from 11 to 45+,
participated in the evaluation. The recruitment was mainly based
on demographic information (such as gender, age or profession).
At the beginning of the experience, a small tutorial of the (project
name removed) application was given. Then, users filled in the
CVQ and one of the two stories was suggested to them, based on
their elicited profile. To assess the CVQ performance on the
initial story suggestion phase, a short pre-visit interview was
conducted. Firstly, users were given a short description of the two
stories (summarizing the plot and the main topics covered) and
they were asked to rate them in a five-point Likert scale.
Participants were only given the short version of the stories, due
to the fact that the full duration of the stories was more than 30
minutes each. Secondly, they were asked to justify their ratings,
explaining what they liked or/and disliked in each story
description. In addition, after the visit the participants discussed in
depth with the researchers about exhibits and story elements and
the results were combined with the pretest results to form the
ground truth of the study.

user could not choose between stories. The results show that the
system matched the user’s manual selection of story, in 75% of
cases (18 right and 6 wrong). However, the qualitative analysis of
user input revealed that in many cases, users did not have a strong
or even clear preference over one of the two stories; two users
actually remarked that they made an impulsive selection, driven
mainly by their familiarity with the narrating characters. Focusing
on the 10 cases where a strong preference was expressed, both in
terms of rating (i.e. having distance greater than one) but also
during the discussion afterwards, we observed that some visitor
decisions were solely based on their likes, and especially dislikes
on particular topics, others were based exclusively on their
preference over the game-flavor of the Theseus story (independent
of the topics covered), and the rest of them were influenced by
both of these factors. Over this set of 10 cases, the system’s
performance reached 90% (9 right and 1 wrong suggestions),
indicating that the CVQ has been successfully employed so as to
measure, prioritize and combine both of the main factors driving
visitor decisions (i.e. topics covered and type of story).
Once the pre-visit interview was completed, a story was assigned
to each visitor by the evaluators (the assignment was predetermined so as to have a balanced set of story experiences) and
the visit started. The elicited profile (based on the visitor’s CVS
answers) is used by the CHESS system in order to make
personalized suggestions and decisions on how the story will
evolve. Throughout the visit, the initial profile is continuously
updated based on visitor actions, using implicit feedback
techniques [23].
After the experience, the visitors were interviewed again, and
asked to assess whether the story assigned to them had actually
evolved according to their likings or not. To answer this question,
a detailed post-visit interview was conducted; the complete story
graphs were presented to the visitors along with all the available
story options and corresponding system decision at each point,
and visitors rated the system’s decisions in a 3 Likert scale (right
decision, neutral, wrong decision). Overall, the (project name
removed) system reached approximately 89% of right decisions
during the visits performed in the two-day evaluation in the
Acropolis Museum, thus tailoring them so as to better match the
visitors’ profiles.

3. EXLPORING EXPLICIT INDIRECT
PROFILING FURTHER: THE PARALLEL
STUDY
Following the positive results about film and reading preferences
obtained from the pilot study, later confirmed in the summative
evaluation, new potential indicators of museum preferences were
explored through a parallel study. In particular, the research team
investigated how different visitor features and choices might
correlate with different elements of exhibition design that can be
personalized. The study was divided in two phases, during which
information was collected from two different environments: the
Acropolis Museum and social media.

3.1 In-situ study at the acropolis Museum
Fig. 1 Evaluation of mobile experience with visitors at the
Acropolis museum
User input and ratings were analyzed and they served as “ground
truth” for evaluating CVQ performance for the initial story
suggestion phase. The analysis was conducted on 24 viable cases;
3 users did not perform the CVQ due to time constraints and 1

The purpose of the study at the Acropolis Museum was to
determine whether visitors’ artistic choices might relate to their
visiting preferences. A questionnaire was administered in the form
of an interview (in English, Greek or Spanish) to 100 visitors (37
male and 63 female). From them, 12 were under 18 years of age,
42 were between 19 and 35, 34 were between 36 and 55, and 12
were above 56. Visitors were approached after their visit, either as

they entered the museum café or on their way out of the museum.
The
questionnaire
can
be
found
at
http://www.chessexperience.eu/v2/index.php?option=com_phoca
download&view=category&id=15.
The first questions were demographic (age, gender, nationality,
and whether they had visited the Acropolis Museum before).
Although the museum experts did not consider gender as a
defining factor in the appreciation of museum content, the design
team reckoned that gender might account for some aspects of the
user experience [24]. The question about previous visits was
relevant because the system could suggest different activities for
returning visitors.
The next set of questions was related to art preferences, including
favorite type of music and artistic style. Music preferences were
collected through an open-ended question to allow participants
describe their exact predilections. For artistic style, three different
portraits of Mona Lisa were presented (images not used here for
copyright purposes, the links are given instead):
1. the original painting, representing a more classical taste
2. a pixelated version (Cubea Lisa by David Grebeling,
http://www.ciphermysteries.com/mona-lisa-but-made-of),
representing modern art inclinations
3. a Lego version, representing a fondness for Pop Art (Mona
Lego by Marco Pece, http://www.ciphermysteries.com/mona-lisabut-made-of).

participants; and 2) control preferences seems to be influenced by
factors depending on both the visitor (e.g. personality, cognitive
style) and the situation (e.g. tiredness, desired information depth).
Consequently, two kinds of questions were included. The first
kind asked visitors about their level of introversion/extraversion.
In this case, low user control corresponded to the answers “I
prefer to do one thing at a time” or “I want clear instructions”,
while answers like “I prefer to do lots of things at once” or “I
prefer to figure things out” would correspond to the fully
interactive option with high user control. The second kind of
questions, linked to the situation, asked about visitors’ general
state (“Today I feel tired” / “Today I feel energetic”) and about
the required depth of information (“Today I want to get a general
feeling of the place”, “Today I am interested in facts”).
On the other hand, a personalized museum application should also
consider the visitors’ location and path. Past research has
identified and classified different kinds of visiting patterns.
According to Véron and Levasseur [26], there are four “visiting
styles”, which can be described by means of animal metaphors
(ant, fish, butterfly and grasshopper). Given that previous studies
[21] have shown that visiting style self-reports can provide valid
information, one multiple-choice question asked visitors to
describe their movement in the museum, in order to capture their
visiting style.

Similarly, three paintings of the Acropolis of Athens, all from
famous Greek artists, were also presented:
1. a realistic representation of the monument, corresponding to
classic art preferences (“The Parthenon” by Louis Dupre, 18101837, http://www.wikigallery.org/wiki/painting_216639/(after)Dupre,-Louis/The-Parthenon-Athens)
2. a more abstract approach, corresponding to modern art
preferences (“Acropolis” by Agenor Asteriadis, 1897-1977,
http://lesxianagnosisbiblioudegas.blogspot.no/2013/11/18981977.html)
3. one corresponding to romantic style art preferences
(“Acropolis”
by
Lykourgos
Kogevinas,
http://www.nationalgallery.gr/site/content.php?sel=247&artwork_
id=71534).
The next question dealt with language style in texts. Three
different fragments describing the same museum object (a threebodied monster) were used: a more formal text; a more personal
text, narrated in first person; and a more playful text, narrated in
first person and including prompts to the user (Table 1). As the
narrative style was considered by museum authors a primary
personalization feature, this question was included in order to see
possible connections to other variables (e.g. gender, age, etc.).
The next question asked visitors what activities they would like to
do in the museum. Such activities included listening to stories,
playing games, creating museum inspired art, commenting on
exhibitions, and engaging in a dialogue with other visitors.
The next set of questions (3 questions) was related to visitors’
cognitive preferences and features. Some of these questions were
inspired from the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator for Cognitive
Style
[25]
to
assess
extraversion/introversion.
Extraversion/Introversion, since extraversion/introversion is
related to user control [21]. Control is an important aspect of
personalized technologies, but our pilot tests of the questionnaire
had shown that: 1) a direct question was not always understood by

Fig. 2. A researcher with visitors during the study at the
Acropolis Museum
Finally, a question related to visitors’ interest in the museum
topics was also included. The topics presented were: everyday
life; mythology; sports; society and politics; history and
Architecture of the Acropolis; and animals. All these themes
corresponded to material developed by the museum’s curators and
educators for the permanent exhibition.

3.2 Study via Social Media
The second phase of the parallel study on indirect profiling
intended to collect additional data from the general public using
social media. The questionnaire was distributed among the
researchers’ social network (asking friends to share with their
friends). This was done independently of a museum visit, since we
only wanted to see if art preferences in general correlated with
specific preferences in museum content. An online survey was
prepared and distributed on Facebook. However, it did not use the
same material, except for one question. The reason was to
minimize possible bias due to user familiarity with particular
objects, as for example, it seemed that most visitors interviewed at
the Acropolis Museum chose the original Mona Lisa picture

possibly because of its artistic importance, instead of taking into
account the general style. Hence, it was decided that in this new
study more neutral stimuli, avoiding famous art objects, would be
used.
The
online
questionnaire
(available
at
http://chess.madgik.di.uoa.gr:8082/cvs-exp/) gathered information
about the following variables: gender; age; music preferences
(pop-rock, classical-jazz, ethnic-folk) and art preferences. For art
preferences three images of tulips were used:
• one for classic art preferences (“Tulips IV” by Anja Slijkhuis,
http://www.globalartnet.org/images/tulips-iv);
• one for abstract art preferences (Step 1 image from
http://www.dragoart.com/tuts/3924/1/1/how-to-drawtulips.htm);
• one for pop art preferences (Final Step from
http://www.dragoart.com/tuts/3924/1/1/how-to-drawtulips.htm).

In addition, the design preferences of users were also recorded
and three images of armchairs were used:
• the first represented classic design (Victor Armchair,
http://yuarmcha.com/green-arm-chairs/);
• the
second
represented
modern
design
(http://i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01666/p_habitatchair_1666734i.jpg);
• the third represented pop art design (Proust’s Geometrica Chair,
http://cappellini.it/en/products/sofas-and-armchairs/proustgeometrica).
Book preferences were also recorded (3 book summaries without
the title: Dostoyevsky’s “Crime and Punishment”, Larsson’s “The
Girl with the Dragon Tattoo”, and Robin’s “Still Life with
Woodpecker”) (Table 2) together with language stylistic
preferences and label length. Over a period of 2 months 155 valid
questionnaires were collected and analyzed.

Table 1 Three-bodied monster descrptions
Formal

First person narration

Informal using questions

The Three-Bodied Monster is a
composite creature consisting of
three winged male figures
conjoined at the waist with
intertwining snaky tails. The
Three-bodied Monster in the
Acropolis museum is a unicum: it
is the only representation of this
kind that we have in the Greek
world. We don’t know who really
the Three-bodied monster is. He
is also called ‘Bluebeard’ because
on each head, the beard was
painted with blue. The color was
more intense when the sculpture
came to light during the
excavations in 1888.

Don’t be fooled by his wry smiles;
he’s a proper daemon. Some call
him Bluebeard because his
beards were painted a bright
blue, back in the ancient times.
You should have seen him when
he was unearthed in 1888; the
blue was more intense then.
We’re not quite sure who he is,
but no matter who he is, he’s one
of
a
kind.
It’s
what
archaeologists call a unicum,
meaning
it
is
the
only
representation of its kind in the
Greek world.

Monsters here, monsters there,
monsters everywhere! Hey, look
to your right, there’s another
horrible monster, a daemon with
three heads! Have you spotted
it? Come on, it’s staring you in
the face– all three faces! This
scary
monster
was
called
Bluebeard because his beards
were painted a bright blue. Can
you see the traces of color?

Classic book preference – Crime
and Punishment
Saint Petersburg, year of
salvation 1866. A double murder
is committed. Victims: an old
female usurer and her
defenseless sister. Perpetrator:
Raskolnikof, an ex-student
consumed by the idea that he is
super-human and is entitled to
commit murder for the benefit of
humanity… The action brings reaction and the crime causes
punishment. What will be his
punishment? And where will it
come from?

Contemporary book preference The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo
Harriet
Vanier
disappeared
thirty six years ago during a
summer festival at the Swedish
resort Hendeby. There was a
police investigation, but there
was never any trace of the
sixteen year old girl. Did she run
away? Was she abducted? Or
murdered? Nobody knows. – the
case is closed, everybody has
forgotten the details. Everybody,
except her uncle, Henrik Vanier,
an elderly industrialist who has
made it a life objective to solve
the mystery before he dies.

Table 2 Available book choice
Pop book preference - Still Life
with Woodpecker
It is a kind of love story taking
place in a Camel cigarette pack.
It reveals the goal of the moon,
describes the difference between
criminals and outlaws, examines
the conflict between an engaged
socialist
and
a
romantic
individualist, and paints the
portrait of a modern society with
rich Arabs, exiled kings and
pregnant cheerleaders. Lastly, it
discusses the mystery of the
pyramids…

4. RESULTS
4.1 Results from the Acropolis Museum
The results of the two studies were statistically analyzed with
SPSS. Since all data were categorical, Chi Square tests for
independence of attributes were performed. For the analysis of
expected low frequencies (e.g. for questions with several possible
answers), Likelihood Ratio tests were used. Finally, Bonferroni
corrections were also applied.
Comparisons from the study at the Acropolis Museum that
provided statistically significant correlations are summarized here.
Different personal characteristics and preferences (e.g. age, mood,
art predilections) were compared to the different important
personalization variables (e.g. narration style, museum activities,
museum themes). The main goal was to find indirect ways to link
stories to different variables.
We will start with the exhibition design variables. Regarding
narration style, it was found that it significantly correlates with:
Age [χ² (6, N=99)= Pearson .034, p<.05], since older visitors
preferred the formal description of the Three-bodied monster.
Music choices [χ² (4, N=99)= Likelihood Ration .05, p=.05], since
people who liked classical music also chose the formal description
of the Three-bodied monster.
Game choices [χ² (2, N=99) Pearson = .019, p <.05], since people
who chose the formal descriptions of the Three-bodied monster
also stated they were not interested in participating in museum
games, whereas people who chose the least formal text, stated
they would like to play games like museum treasure hunting or
role playing games.
A second set of results concerns museum activities that visitors
were likely to engage with, which significantly correlate with:
Art preferences [χ² (2, N=99) Pearson = .049, p <.05]. Although
not many visitors chose to play mini games in the museum, it
seems that this is especially the case of people who chose the
classic Mona Lisa. This is an important finding, since simply by
asking visitors’ art preferences in an initial quiz, applications
could adapt their activities accordingly.
Museum themes [χ²(1, N=99) Pearson = .041, p <.05]. People
interested in art activities in the museum chose the mythology
theme. The mutual dependence between preferred activities and
themes may constitute a powerful instrument for a successful
adaptive application, since preferred topics of interest can be
detected early in the visit.
Mood [χ²(2, N=99) Pearson = .048, p <.05]. Again, it was not
surprising to find that people feeling energetic and relaxed were
more likely to engage in exploratory museum games than people
who report feeling tired. Consequently, asking visitors’ mood
should be useful to define the adaptive content, especially
regarding paths and activities.
Visiting style [χ² (3, N=99) Pearson = .05, p =.05]. “Butterfly”
visitors were not very likely to write any museum related
comments, compared to other visiting styles, and especially to
“fish” visitors, who seemed to like the option of writing
comments. An application that could record visitors’ moving
patterns and extract their visiting style, could suggest different
museum activities for different styles, adapting to visitors’
preferences.

A third set of observations regarded the museum themes, which
correlated with:
Gender [χ²(1, N=99) Pearson = .039, p <.05]. Women were found
to like everyday life in Ancient Greece and in particular, aspects
like clothing, body care, etc. A quiz asking visitors to provide
gender information could allow effective adaptation.
Place of origin [χ²(6, N=99) Pearson = .039, p <.05]. Greeks,
other Mediterranean and Northern Europeans were mostly
interested in mythology. On the contrary, visitors from Oceania
(Australia and New Zealand) were not very interested in it.
Knowing visitors’ place of origin may be important in
determining what information about exhibits will be presented.
However, the present study used a limited sample (Greece=40,
North America=20, Oceania=10, Other Mediterranean =8, North
Europe = 11, South America = 5, Other =5), implying that all the
statistical analysis can only show possible indications, worth
studying further though in future works.
Age [χ²(3, N=99) Pearson = .002, p <.05]. Younger visitors were
more interested in mythology than older visitors. Again, visitors’
age can give important information about different thematic
preferences and should definitely be included as a personalization
instrument in adaptive applications.
Other museum themes [χ²(1, N=99) Pearson = .044, p <.05; χ²(1,
N=99) Pearson = .039, p <.05]. Visitors who did not like mini
games, did not like themes about sports in Ancient Greece either.
On the other hand, visitors who were not interested in sports were
not interested in animals in ancient Athens either. It seems that
there was a correlation between different themes. This is a useful
information for adaptive applications, which may extrapolate
information obtained with the quiz to avoid asking too many
questions and at the same time allow more effective adaptivity.
Returning visitors [χ²(1, N=99) Pearson = .017, p <.05]. People
who had come to the museum before seemed to be more
interested in society and politics than people who visited for the
first time. It seems plausible that having previously been in
contact with the exhibits’ basic information, visitors wanted to
explore other aspects in their returning visit. Thus, a profiling quiz
should take this piece of data into account, so that the application
presents basic or “alternative” knowledge.
The analyses also provided relevant results regarding visitor
personal features and choices. The first set of results concerns
visiting style, which significantly correlated with:
Place of origin [χ² (18, N=99) Pearson = .013, p <.05]. This
correlation has been evidenced by other studies (Antoniou and
Lepouras 2010). Hence, it was decided to pursue further the
investigation, by dividing the participants into 7 main
geographical areas. The results showed that Greeks followed
mostly an “ant” visiting style, with “fish” in second position. It
seems that Greeks had a clear preference for linearity of
movement, whereas northern European seemed to follow nonlinear patterns in their movement (“butterfly” visiting style). It is
interesting to note that no Greek showed “grasshopper” behavior.
Although the representability of the sample requires further
research, the current and other studies seem to point at a strong
connection between visitor’s place of origin and museum
movement. If this is the case, then future museum applications
should take into account visitors’ origin and adapt accordingly.
Cognitive traits [χ² (3, N=99) Pearson = .019, p <.05]. Previous
studies (Antoniou and Lepouras 2010) have also indicated that

visiting style correlates with cognitive style. In our case, the most
extravert visitors showed a “fish” behavior; while the most
introvert visitors showed, by far, an “ant” behavior. As above, the
system’s awareness of visitors’ personality would allow
suggesting different visiting approaches (e.g. more collaborative
or individual). At this point it is important to note that cognitive
traits in this study were assessed with only 3 questions from the
MBTI, implying that extraversion and introversion here are rather
indications of extraverted/introverted behavior and not definite
personality analysis.
Mood [χ² (6, N=99) Likelihood Ratio .02, p <.05]. More active
visitors were more likely to show “ant” behavior. In addition,
active visitors did not show any “grasshopper” behavior.
Understandably, tired visitors do not have the stamina to see each
and every exhibit on detail, and consequently adopt different
visiting styles. Therefore, a quiz question asking visitors about
their mood upon arrival provides valuable information about their
potential moving patterns, thus allowing for an adaptive system to
suggest the most suitable museum paths.
The second set of results regards other art preferences, which
correlated with:
Art preferences [χ² (4, N=99) Pearson = .008, p <.05]. Most
people who chose the original Mona Lisa also chose the classic
postcard of the Acropolis, which indicates a consistency in
people’s artistic preferences. This is a useful information for an
adaptive application, which may extrapolate information obtained
with the quiz to avoid asking too many questions and at the same
time allow more effective adaptivity.
Returning visitors [χ² (2, N=99) Pearson = .029, p <.05]. People
who chose the romantic style postcard had been in the museum
before, while people who chose the classic postcard had not. It
may seem that first- timers were interested in a realistic version of
the monument, whereas returning visitors, having seen the
monument before, were more interested in alternative
interpretations of the site. This is consistent with the correlation
between returning visits and museum themes: if indeed returning
visitors allow space for other interpretations, it could be used to
adapt the quantity and quality of information in cultural heritage
personalized applications.
Cognitive traits [χ² (2, N=99) Pearson = .001, p <.05]. This is an
interesting finding, since this very high correlation indicates that
people who chose the classic postcard were mostly introverts,
while people who chose the romantic one were mostly extraverts.
As cognitive traits are linked to both visiting style (see above) and
art preferences, knowing the latter might provide valuable
information to suggest different paths and visiting approaches
(e.g. collaborative activities). The same results are observed when
all extraversion questions were combined [χ² (2, N=99) Pearson =
.034, p <.05], which validates the findings.
The last results of the study conducted in situ at the Acropolis
Museum concern visitors’ mood, which seems to be heavily
affected by age [χ²(6, N=99) Pearson = .017, p <.05]. Not
surprisingly, the older visitors are, the more tired they report.
Since visitors’ mood also affected their visiting style (see above),
personalized applications should ask for the age and adapt the
visit to this variable (e.g. tend to propose more relaxed, “fish”-like
paths to elder people).

4.2 Results from Social media
The second part of the parallel study analyzed data gathered from
Facebook. There were only three significant findings, although
only one can be applied to the design of museum personalized
applications. Firstly, it was found that age and gender highly
correlated, which implies a biased sample due to its limited size
(N=155). Secondly, there was a correlation between gender and
furniture style preferences [χ² (2, N=155)< .005 and Likelihood
Ratio (2, N=155) < .005]. It seems that males preferred modern
furniture compared to other styles like classic or pop. Thirdly, and
most interesting for us, gender highly correlated with text style
preferences. In particular, women seem more open to alternative
text styles, like personal and informal, whereas men seem to
prefer standard and formal text styles [χ² (2, N=155) <.05 and
Likelihood Ratio (2, N=155) < .05]. For the design of museum
adaptive technologies, this finding implies that women could
easily accept a more playful and informal text or narration style.

5. DISCUSSION
Profiling for museum application personalization is a very
challenging task. Visitors are not only unique personalities with
specific goals and preferences; they are also affected by particular
circumstances, such as mood or available time for the visit. Any
profile initialization method has to take into account all these
factors in order to be truly effective and usable in a museum
context. It needs also to be based on an appealing and nonintrusive design, and to be brief and interesting.
The study presented in this paper produced useful results
regarding quiz design on several aspects of the museum
experience. Correlations between exhibition elements (topics,
activities, and text style), visitor choices (in art, style, and music)
and personal traits (age, gender, origin, personality, mood,
returning visit and visiting style) were found. The personalization
approach followed in the present work combines situational
dependent personal traits (like mood, visiting style, etc) with
situation independent traits (like extraversion, age, gender) and
exhibition elements, showing specific relations among all these.
Asking about gender and age may be also useful for the
personalization of topics and narrative style. Women seem to
prefer empathic approaches like information on people’s lives and
fantasy tales. Equally, visitors’ country of origin has a role in the
topics they are interested in. Museum professionals should take
into account these different cultural perspectives, and design
contents that are meaningful to different visitors or that help them
better understand the museum’s own cultural context.
Applications also should take into account whether visitors have
already visited the museum. In this case, the system should
propose topics other than the basic, descriptive information about
exhibits. It seems logical that visitors who have already been at
the museum will have different museum interests than newcomers. Moreover, it is worth mentioning here that returning
visitors also wanted to go beyond the realistic representation of
the monument (unlike new-comers) and move towards less
realistic representations that emphasize on emotions, as romantic
art does. It might be the case that the first time visitors view a
monument, they are engaged in rational cognitive processes in
order to understand the characteristics of the place, and after they
have done that, they are able to engage in more affective
processes. In any case, this is a very interesting finding, which
definitely requires further psychological research.

Visitors’ mood is also a good indicator for personalization, since
it influences the kind of activities visitors would like to engage
with. The more energetic the visitor feels, the more he/she is
willing to undertake explorative activities and exchange with
others. Finally, different movement patterns (visiting style)
appeared to be related with different museum activities. The
specific results obtained in this study are difficult to interpret, but
may be explained by the third level of correlation, where
associations between personal characteristics have been found. In
particular, visiting style is related to country of origin, personality,
and mood. It is therefore possible that the wish or not to live
written comments respectively by “fish” and “butterfly” visitors is
related to their cultural background and/or their level of
extroversion/introversion. What seems clear is that introverts tend
to follow “ant” patterns, while extraverts move like “fishes” (who
expressed their wish to leave comments). On the other hand,
visitors who feel energetic tend to visit the exhibition with more
detail (“ant” style) than those who are tired. Considering that it is
difficult for visitors to directly reflect and report on their
movement patterns in the museum, having indirect ways to
estimate their visiting style might be very helpful.
In addition, Art preferences (including painting and music) are
powerful instruments for indirect profiling and personalization,
since they can be related to several elements: narrative style
(music), preferred activities (painting), and topics of interest
(style). The general conclusion to be drawn for personalization is
that visitors who like “classical” art, prefer more “traditional”
museum experiences.
Certain correlations can also allow extrapolations, and therefore
the quiz can be shorter (by using questions that are related to
several variables) and more engaging (by using “catchy” instead
of challenging or sensitive questions). For example, visiting style
(see above) or personality. Adapting psychometric questionnaires
to ask visitors about their character may be tricky. Art preferences
come in handy again, as the results of this study support their
direct correlation to personality types. In our case, classic artistic
preferences imply higher chances of introversion, while more
romantic styles imply higher changes of extroversion.
A similar kind of extrapolation could be performed with mood.
Visitors’ disposition influenced the activities they would like to
undertake at the museum, and is linked to both visiting style (see
above) and age. It would be logical to link visiting style, activities
and age through mood and assume that the older the visitor, the
lighter the path and activities he/she will like to follow.
Finally, there are correlations between visitor choices and
between museum features. In the first case, different kinds of
artistic styles or presentation formats correlate between them (e.g.
“classical” Mona Lisa with “classical” Acropolis). In the second
case, independent museum themes that were conceptually linked
were also statistically linked (e.g. sports and animals). Moreover,
specific themes were also linked with specific activities (e.g. art
and mythology). This intellectual consistency may prove very
helpful to personalize more in depth information and museum
activities from an initial general question about interests.
It is interesting to note here that during the evaluation process
many participants were interested in finding out what their
answers might mean for their personality. It seemed that many
viewed this quiz as a pop psychology test and were interested in
the results. In addition, in the Melesso story there was one such
quiz, as part of the activities associated with that character, called
“"What role would you have in the ancient Athens Panathenaea

procession?". It was very interesting to see how involved
participants became, since information as given back to the users
concerning her personality. Thus, creating quizzes that give
(personality) information back to the user are important
participation motivators and our future work will explore this
aspect further.

6. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presented a study related to indirect user profiling in a
museum context. In order to investigate how different visitor
characteristics and choices might correlate with different elements
in a museum experience that can be personalized, quiz-like
questionnaires were designed for the Acropolis Museum and
administered both in situ and through social media.
Our experience confirms that there is a trade-off between using
questions that can lead to concrete decisions on user preferences
in a time efficient manner and making the quiz both an accurate
profiling tool for authors and an interesting experience for
visitors. If the aim is to transform the traditional museum visit to
an appealing storytelling experience, the quiz needs to become an
appropriate introduction to the experience; it must be short and
intriguing, and attempt to record the user’s profile in a subtle and
non-intrusive manner. Our study seems to indicate that art
preferences (i.e. film, visual arts, music) and other visitor
characteristics (i.e. age, gender, mood, etc.) may be a powerful
instrument for personalization. However, this is an exploratory
study, which aims to provide preliminary results that open the
way for further research in several directions.
Although our research design was tailored to the user profiles and
the storytelling purposes of the Acropolis Museum, our findings
can be extrapolated in different ways, depending on the particular
goals of each museum. As an example, we provide two possible
scenarios. In the first scenario, a museum would like to offer
collaborative and/or gaming activities. In this case, age, mood,
origin, preferred topics, and artistic preferences might be
important factors to gather through a profiling application. In the
second scenario, a museum would like to offer multiple stories of
different themes (possibly based on different interpretations of the
exhibits). In this case, it would be useful to collect information
about visitors’ gender, age, place of origin, artistic preferences,
and whether it is or not their first visit.
In conclusion, a carefully designed visitor quiz can lead to
effective personalization and consequently enhance the museum
experience. Although asking direct questions could provide more
accurate information, we observed that people find the indirect
approach of a quiz interesting and intriguing. Based on our
observations on participant motivators, our future work will focus
on the actual quiz itself beyond the context of storytelling. We are
planning to adopt a pop psychology approach in the quiz design,
such as those that have become popular in social media (e.g.
“What is your dream holiday place?” “Which famous character
are you?”). We would then like to test this approach in a real
museum setting, using the inferred user profile to offer different
visit paths in the exhibition. In addition, marketing theory will be
considered, especially related to hedonic consumption to study
further demographic characteristics, like age, gender, cultural
background and their relation to museum content (e.g. [27]).

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The present study was conducted within the framework of the
CHESS project. CHESS (Cultural Heritage Experiences through
Socio-personal interactions and Storytelling) was co-funded by

the European Commission within FP7 Framework Programme.
We thank all of the project team members for their contribution.
We would especially like to thank Manolis Tsangaris, Vassilis
Kourtis, Manolis Synodinos, and Fabien Mairesse for their
contribution in the development of the CHESS quiz system, as
well as Stavrina Poulou for her help in conducting the large study
at the Acropolis Museum.

8. REFERENCES
[1] Aoidh, E.M., Bertolotto, M., and Wilson, D.C. 2012.
Towards dynamic behavior-based profiling for reducing
spatial information overload in map browsing activity.
GeoInformatica, 16, 409–434.
[2] Noor, S., and Martinez, K. 2009. Using social data as context
for making recommendations: an ontology based approach.
Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Context, Information
and Ontologies (CIAO '09), Jose Manuel Gomez-Perez,
Peter Haase, Marcel Tilly, and Paul Warren (Eds.). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, Article 7 , 8 pages.
DOI=10.1145/1552262.1552269.
[3] Lykourentzou, I., Claude, X., Naudet, Y., Tobias, E.,
Antoniou, A., Lepouras, G., and Vassilakis, C. 2013.
Improving museum visitors' Quality of Experience through
intelligent recommendations: A visiting style-based
approach. Proceedings of the Intelligent Environments
(Workshops), 507-518.
[4] Tan, E.S., and Oinonen, K. 2009. Personalising Content
Presentation in Museum Exhibitions - A Case Study.
Proceedings of the 2009 15th International Conference on
Virtual Systems and Multimedia (VSMM '09). IEEE
Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 232-238.
DOI=10.1109/VSMM.2009.42.
[5] Gaeta, A., Gaeta, M., and Ritrovato, P. 2009. A grid based
software architecture for delivery of adaptive and
personalised learning experiences. Personal Ubiquitous
Comput. 13 (3), 207-217. DOI=10.1007/s00779-007-0183-y.
[6] Findlater, L., and McGrenere, J. 2004. A comparison of
static, adaptive, and adaptable menus. Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI '04). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 89-96.
DOI=10.1145/985692.985704.
[7] Walczak, K., Wojciechowski, R., and Cellary, W. 2006.
Dynamic interactive VR network services for education.
Proceedings of the ACM symposium on Virtual reality
software and technology (VRST '06). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 277-286. DOI=10.1145/1180495.1180552.
[8] Jacucci, G., Spagnolli, A., Chalambakis, A., Morrison, A.,
Liikkanen, L., Roveda, S., and Bertoncini, M. 2009. Bodily
Explorations in Space: Social Experience of a Multimodal
Art Installation. Proceedings of the 12th IFIP TC 13
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction:
Part II (INTERACT '09), T. Gross, J. Gulliksen, P. Kotzé, L.
Oestreicher, P. Palanque, R. Oliveira Prates, and M.
Winckler, Eds. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 62-75.
DOI=10.1007/978-3-642-03658-3_11.
[9] Feinberg, M., Geisler, G., Whitworth, E., and Clark, E. 2012.
Understanding personal digital collections: an
interdisciplinary exploration. Proceedings of the Designing
Interactive Systems Conference (DIS '12). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 200-209. DOI=10.1145/2317956.2317988.

[10] Weilenmann, A., Hillman, T., and Jungelius, B. 2013.
Instagram at the museum: communicating the museum
experience through social photo sharing. Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI '13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1843-1852.
DOI=10.1145/2470654.2466243.
[11] Lin, Y., Bai, X., Ye, Y., and Real, W. 2012. Constructing
narratives using fast feedback. Proceedings of the 2012
iConference (iConference '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
486-487. DOI=10.1145/2132176.2132258.
[12] Talavera, A.S., Darias, A.J.R., Rodriguez, P.D., and Ávila,
L.A. (2012). Facebook, heritage and tourism reorientation.
The cases of Tenerife and Fuerteventura (Canary Isles,
Spain). Int. J. Web Based Communities, 8 (1), 24-39.
DOI=10.1504/IJWBC.2012.044680
[13] Antoniou, A., Lykourentzou, I., Rompa, J., Tobias, E.,
Lepouras, G., Vassilakis, C., and Naudet, Y. 2013. User
Profiling: Towards a Facebook Game that Reveals Cognitive
Style. Games and Learning Alliance, 349-353. Springer
International Publishing.
[14] Fosh, L., Benford, S., Reeves, S., and Koleva, B. 2014.
Gifting personal interpretations in galleries. Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI '14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 625-634.
DOI=10.1145/2556288.2557259.
[15] Ardissono, L. Kufli, T., and Petrelli, D. 2012.
Personalization in cultural heritage: the road travelled and the
one ahead. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 22
(1-2), 73-99. DOI=10.1007/s11257-011-9104-x.
[16] Falk, J.H., Koran Jr., J.J., Dierking, L.D., and Dreblow, L.
2010. Predicting Visitor Behavior. Curator: The Museum
Journal, 28, 249–258.
[17] Hameed, M.A., Ramachandram, S., and Al Jadaan, O. 2012.
Information Gain Clustering through Prototype-Embedded
Genetic K-Mean Algorithm (IGCPGKA): a novel heuristic
approach for personalisation of cold start problem.
Proceedings of the Second International Conference on
Computational Science, Engineering and Information
Technology (CCSEIT '12). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
390-395. DOI=10.1145/2393216.2393282.
[18] Lin, C., Xie, R., Guan, X., Li, L., and Li, T. 2014.
Personalized news recommendation via implicit social
experts. Inf. Sci. 254, 1-18. DOI=10.1016/j.ins.2013.08.034.
[19] Kuflik, T., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., Gorfinkel, A., Jbara, S.,
Kats, S., Sheidin, J., and Kashtan, N. 2011. A visitor's guide
in an active museum: Presentations, communications, and
reflection. J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 3 (3), Article 11, 25 pages.
DOI=10.1145/1921614.1921618.
[20] Roussou, M., Katifori, A., Pujol, L., Vayanou, M., and
Rennick-Egglestone, S.J. 2013. A life of their own: museum
visitor personas penetrating the design lifecycle of a mobile
experience. CHI '13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI EA '13). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 547-552. DOI=10.1145/2468356.2468453.
[21] Antoniou, A., and Lepouras, G. 2010. Modeling visitors'
profiles: A study to investigate adaptation aspects for
museum learning technologies. J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 3 (2),
Article 7, 19 pages. DOI=10.1145/1841317.1841322.

[22] Bonis, B., Stamos, J., Vosinakis, S., Andreou, I.,and
Panayiotopoulos, T. 2009. A platform for virtual museums
with personalized content. Multimedia Tools Appl. 42 (2),
139-159. DOI=10.1007/s11042-008-0231-2.
[23] Vayanou, M., Karvounis, M., Katifori, A., Kyriakidi, M.,
Roussou, M., Ioannidis, Y. 2014. The CHESS Project:
Adaptive Personalized Storytelling Experiences in Museums,
UMAP Project Synergy Workshop
[24] Sheng, C. W., & Chen, M. C. (2012). A study of experience
expectations of museum visitors. Tourism
management, 33(1), 53-60.

[25] Briggs Myers, I., and Myers, P.B. 1995. Gifts differing:
Understanding personality type. Mountain View, CA:
Davies-Black Publishing.
[26] Veron, E., and Levasseur, M. 1983. Ethnographie de
l’exposition: l'espace, le corps et le sens. Centre Georges
Pompidou, Paris: Bibliothèque Publique d’Information.
[27] Hirschman, E.C., and Holbrook, M.B. 1982. Hedonic
consumption: emerging concepts, methods and propositions.
The Journal of Marketing, 92-101.

