Recent Advances in Business Management and Marketing

Designing a mobile app for museums according to the drivers of visitor
satisfaction i
FEDERICA PALUMBO
Department of Management - Sapienza University of Rome
ITALY
federica.palumbo@uniroma1.it
GANDOLFO DOMINICI
Department S.E.A.S. - University of Palermo
ITALY
gandolfo.dominici@libero.it
GIANPAOLO BASILE
University of Salerno
ITALY
gibasile@unisa.it
Abstract: The aim of this study is to identify the key factors as antecedents of visitor satisfaction for the design
of a mobile app for museums. To our aim we use the Kano model that allows to categorize service attributes
according to how they are perceived by customers and to estimate their impact on customer satisfaction. We
collected qualitative data trough 300 questionnaires administered to tourists visiting the Sicilian cities of
Palermo and Trapani over a period of 3 months (October- December 2012). The results of our analysis can be
relevant for museum and public managers to plan strategic and operative activities, for researcher in the field of
touristic marketing, for application developers, and for all those concerned with touristic and cultural heritage
issues.
Key-Words: Museum Marketing, Mobile App, Mobile Tourism, Mobile App Marketing, Kano Model,
Customer Satisfaction, Cultural Tourism, Museum Technology.
tools to get in touch and keep the relations with a
growing number of customers.
The new “mobile economy” has relevant
implications for Internet marketing strategies. The
adoption of a mobile marketing strategy allows the
organization to follow the client/user along the
whole relationship cycle.
In the tourism sector this opens a wide range of
opportunities to attract and gain the fidelity of
visitors. “Mobile tourists” can go through a new
way of travelling as “virtual tourists” for which the
travelling experience is empowered by the
information and entertainment coming “also” (but of
course not exclusively) from their new “travel
buddy”: the mobile technology device.
Tourist attractions like museums must not lose this
chance and need to find new ways to get the
attention of this new kind of tourists, becoming
“Museum 2.0”.
Mobile apps have the potential to personalize the
users’ museum experience whenever and wherever
they like, integrating collections, exhibitions and

1 Introduction
In spite of the global economic crisis, the mobile
internet devices sector (including smartphones,
tablet and similar hybrids) is among the few sector
experiencing a continuous and fast growth.
At a global level we have today about 1.5 millions
of mobile app, 500,000 tablets’ apps and over 60
billions of mobile apps downloaded by smartphones
and tablets [1]. In the United States about 119.3
million people (51% of mobile phone users) own a
smartphone [2]. In Italy, according to estimates,
about 32 million of smartphones, 2.5 million of
Internet TVs users and 2.9 million of tablet have
been sold by the end of 2012. Forecasts say that in
2015 the sales of smartphones will overcome those
of Personal Computers (in Italy 49 million versus 47
million) [1]. These devices are becoming a daily
presence in the life of people who want to be
“always connected”. This represents a great
opportunity for the software industry that can
exploit a fast growing market, as well as for any
kind of firm that can take advantage of these new

ISBN: 978-960-474-306-3

159

Recent Advances in Business Management and Marketing

personalized products which better satisfy their
desires, needs and expectations [7][8]. If the
museum gives “voice” to the visitors and realizes
their desires, it will probably gain a strong
competitive advantage. Several studies have focused
on the identification and interpretation of the most
empirical elements considered as relevant by
visitors [9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18].
Among these studies, Kuo et al. focused on tourists’
interpretation experiences of a museum applying the
Kano’s model and the Importance-Performance
Analysis (IPA) [18]. The authors conducted two
empirical studies in Mainland China and Taiwan in
order to identify service elements considered as
most important by visitors. Burton et al. identified
the attributes of choice in repeat museum visitation
conducting a research in the two major museums of
Australia [15].
However, involving the visitors in the design of the
offer is not sufficient to maintain a competitive
advantage over time. In order to be competitive,
museums should also “stimulate the desire to
know” [19], offering to the visitor an “info-culturaltainment” experience, characterized by the
interaction among leisure, entertainment, culture,
education and socialization [20].
Towards this goal, interactive technology can
represent an important tool able to reinforce and to
integrate
both
museum
marketing
and
communication strategies. Through the power of
technology, the museum can reach a great number
of virtual visitors, that could potentially become real
visitors [21]. Interactive technologies can enhance
the current and potential visitors’ experience,
allowing them to become more involved in their
tour along the museum galleries [22][23].
A considerable amount of research has been done
with regard to the role of interactive technology in
museum management [21][22][23][24][25][26][27]
[28][29]. Nevertheless, there has been little research
conducted specifically on the role of “mobile
applications for museums”. This is probably due to
the fact that the wide diffusion of this new
technology is very recent.
As Hume and Mills [23] pointed out, only few kinds
of interactive technologies have currently been
adopted in museums, such as internet, handhelds
and touch screens [30][31][32]. However, they are
optimistic about the future: “many new and
emergent technologies including social media,
online storage and e-commerce are available and
will advance interactive and online services in the
future.” [23].
We believe that mobile application technology is
one of the main successful emergent technology and

other offerings into a much broader range of usecase scenarios than we have ever imagined.
Geo-referenced information can to attract tourists
inviting them to visit the closest museum and
maintain the relation after the trip, thus getting more
chances of repeated visits.
The challenge for these services is to be able to
rapidly supply customer oriented content at low cost
(or for free) following the growing expectations of
customers/users.
Hence,
understanding
the
antecedents of the user experience becomes pivotal.
Functional aspects are not enough to overcome the
new challenges; a very good app in functional terms
could result useless to reach the target. Therefore, it
is necessary to design apps according to users’
expectations and desires so that they can be able to
establish and keep the virtual relation.
In this study we apply the Kano Model[3] to a
cluster of Sicilian museum visitors in order to
design a user oriented mobile app for museum.
The island of Sicily (Italy) for its geographic
position, historical heritage and mild weather has a
strong cultural touristic vocation that still has not
been fully exploited. Sicilian museums are
frequently undervalued and barely visible on the
web. Mobile application technology, due to the low
costs of diffusion, can enhance significantly the
Sicilian museum offer, but unfortunately most of the
Sicilian of museums are badly managed by local
government, which does not invest enough financial
resources and is not able to innovate and understand
the advantage of web based services. The reason
why of this study is to show the potential of Sicilian
cultural tourism and how it could be exploited by a
more enlightened governance of the sector.

2 Theoretical background
The role of the museum has become increasingly
complex in the last years.
Authors as Kotler [4] and McLean [5] stated that
museum marketing should adopt a visitors-focus
approach oriented to design an offer able to meet
visitors’ expectations. Hence, first of all, it is crucial
to know which are needs and expectations of
visitors and their actual level of customer
satisfaction/dissatisfaction. Furthermore, museum
managers should conceive the visitor experience as
a way to establish a symbiotic relationship between
the visitor and the cultural resource [6]. The visitororiented approach should, indeed, involve the
visitors to participate to the design of the offer.
Consumers have become more demanding, more
informed and, at the same time, more willing to
supply information in exchange for more

ISBN: 978-960-474-306-3

160

Recent Advances in Business Management and Marketing

the product or service?” (Functional form of the
question), “How would you feel if requirement X
were not present in the product/service?”
(Dysfunctional form of the question). For each
functional and dysfunctional question, the
customer can select one of five alternative
answers as expressions of different degrees of
perception: 1. I like it that way; 2. It must be that
way; 3. I’m neutral; 4. I can live with it that way;
5. I dislike it that way. The answers to each
functional-dysfunctional question pair are crossreferenced using a matrix formulated by Kano
(fig. 1), and the perceptions are thus evaluated
into
quality
dimensions
(M:
must-be
requirement; I: indifferent; R: reverse; O: onedimensional; A: attractive; Q: questionable
requirements).

its managerial implications could be considered a
new fascinating field of study; nonetheless the
marketing implications of the implementation of
these technologies to museums has been scarcely
covered in the literature.
With this research we aim to fill this literature gap
and to stimulate some reflections about the
potentiality of this new technology for museums.

3 The Kano Model
In this study we apply the model proposed in 1984
by Noriaki Kano. The main change introduced by
the Kano model, compared with traditional
customer satisfaction measurement methods, is the
idea that not all features of a product/service have
the same impact on customer satisfaction. On the
basis of this assumption, the Kano model lists the
attributes of a product/service in five categories,
depending on the quality perceived by
customers/users and the capacity to meet
their
expectations:
• Must-be (dissatisfiers or basic factors): their
presence will not increase the satisfaction level
significantly, while their absence will cause
extreme dissatisfaction.
• One-dimensional (performance factors): these
factors cause satisfaction when their performance
is high, and dissatisfaction when their
performance is low. The company should try to
be competitive here.
• Attractive (satisfiers or excitement factors):
these requirements cause customer satisfaction if
delivered, while they do not cause dissatisfaction
if they are not delivered. Their presence
strengthens the competitive advantage of the firm
because such factors increase the value of the
product or service as perceived by the customer.
• Indifferent: the customer does not care about
whether this feature is present or not.
• Reverse: the customer does not desire this kind
of product requirement, and its presence causes a
great level of dissatisfaction; its absence
determines satisfaction.
The execution of measurement in the Kano Model
follows four steps:
1. Identification of the customer’s needs: it can
be implemented via individual interviews or
through focus-group interviews with members
who already know the product or service.
2. Development of the Kano questionnaire: The
Kano questionnaire is characterized by pairs of
questions for each customer requirement: “How
would you feel if requirement X were present in

ISBN: 978-960-474-306-3

Fig. 1 - Kano Evaluation matrix (adapted from
Kano et al., 1984).
Answers to dysfunctional
question

Answers
to
functional
question

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

1.
Q
R
R
R
R

2.
A
I
I
I
R

3.
A
I
I
I
R

4.
A
I
I
I
R

5.
O
M
M
M
Q

3. Administration of interviews.
4. Interpretation and evaluation of the results.

4 The application of the Kano model
to Sicilian museums
We apply the Kano Model to identify express and
latent needs of cultural tourists and to design a
mobile app for museum according to the ideal
characteristics that better satisfy their expectations.
Our research is related to the segment of visitors of
Sicilian museums located in the provinces of
Palermo and Trapani. We followed the four steps
proposed by Noriaki Kano’s model.
Prior to distributing the questionnaires to the
cultural tourists, we held three focus-group
interviews (groups of seven people) with people
who had experience with mobile apps for museums
in order to identify explicit and latent needs and
expectations.
Using their answers and the debate that followed,
we have been able to identify twenty expected
features that we have grouped into four main areas,
as shown in Table 1.

161

Recent Advances in Business Management and Marketing

declared they had a bachelor’s degree, 36% had a
high-school diploma, 17% had a master’s degree,
and 3% had a Ph.D., while 4% had a middle-school
diploma. With regard to professions, 40% of the
sample were employees, 17% were retirees, 28%
were self-employed, 5% were students, and 10%
were unemployed. 63% of the respondents owned
mobile devices (smart phone and/or tablet/hybrid
devices, etc.) and the 35% of them has downloaded
and experienced at least one museum app.

Tab. 1 - The requirements of a mobile app for
museums identified by users
MUSEUM
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

How to get to the museum
Description of the museum structure
Time of opening and closing
Tickets booking and/or purchasing
Additional services (café, restaurant, museum
information
Contacts
Timetable of planned exhibitions, events and tours.
Real-time news on new products and events
ARTWORKS

shop)

4.1 The interpretation and evaluation of the
results

Museum artworks photo-gallery
Audio-guides with detailed information about each artwork
Explanatory files of the artworks
3D virtual tour
Virtual tour bookmarks
MAP

The last phase in the development of the Kano
Model is the interpretation and evaluation of the
results. After the data collection, we proceeded to
the classification of the nature of each requirement.
We calculated the total number of responses for
each requirement, using the Kano evaluation matrix
(Fig. 1) to identify the categories according to the
questionnaire responses. There are several methods
to interpret and evaluate results of Kano model [33].
We have chosen the “evaluation by frequency” to
identify the nature of each requirement and the
“M>O>A>I rule” to interpret results of the research.

14. Museum map
15. Suggestions for guided tours
ACCESSIBILITY AND USABILITY
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

Multilingual option
Available off-line
Friendly and efficient user interface
Free download
Accessible on any device (Mac, Android, and so on)

Following the identification of the requirements, we
prepared the questionnaire in order to discover the
nature of these requirements. Our questionnaire
consisted of two parts:
- Personal information (gender, age, qualification,
profession, place of origin), mobile devices
ownership and experience.
- 40 questions in functional and dysfunctional
form investigating the nature of the 20
requirements identified in step 1. The questions
were grouped in classes to facilitate the overall
comprehension of the survey.
After that, we administered 300 questionnaires to a
sample of cultural tourists of Sicilian museums. The
questionnaires were administered in printed form
and were available in the museums receptions over a
period of 3 months between October and December
2012. After a screening of the questionnaires
collected, 287 (out of 300) questionnaires were
considered valid (96%), of which 198 (69%) in the
province of Palermo and 89 (31%) questionnaires in
the province of Trapani.
The total sample consisted of people who were
visitors of the selected Sicilian museums.
The sample of respondents consisted of 205 (71%)
Italian guests (52 Sicilians and 153 non-Sicilian
Italians) and by 82 (29%) foreigners.
As for sex distribution, 41% of the respondents were
male, and 59% female. The average age of
respondents was 50 years old. About the level of
education in our sample 40% of respondents

ISBN: 978-960-474-306-3

4.1.1 Evaluation by frequency
We used the “evaluation by frequency” method to
determine the category of each requirement on the
basis of the maximum frequency obtained, as shown
in Table 2. Questionable results (Q) have very low
frequencies, thus the questionnaire had a high level
of reliability.
Table 2 - Classification of requirements in
accordance with evaluation by frequency method.
Requirement
How to get to the museum
Description of the
museum
Time of opening and
closing
Tickets booking and/or
purchasing
Additional services
information
Contacts
Timetable of planned
exhibitions, events and
tours
Real-time news
Museum artworks photogallery
Audio-guides
Explanatory files of the
artworks
3D virtual tour
Virtual tour bookmarks
Museum map
Suggestions for guided
tours

162

O
80

M
106

A
13

I
54

R
33

Q
1

45

33

139

59

11

-

124

67

73

19

3

1

152

63

24

23

25

-

69

37

136

43

2

-

81

143

13

28

21

1

136

23

103

14

11

-

23

12

18

178

54

2

43

121

19

89

15

-

115

67

84

18

3

-

23

16

21

189

58

-

23
17
46

12
5
148

83
19
26

52
156
43

116
88
24

1
2
-

37

20

164

43

23

-

Recent Advances in Business Management and Marketing

Multilingual option
Available off-line
Friendly and efficient user
interface
Free download
Accessible on any device

73
143

157
48

15
43

34
39

7
14

1
-

48

156

19

62

2

-

101
57

5
27

80
178

76
22

23
3

2
-

connection. This requirement is very important for
foreign tourists, which usually do not have a
subscription to the Italian telephone/internet
companies. The last one-dimensional requirement is
the free download: people are not willing to pay to
buy a museum app. On the other hand, museum
represents a special form of nonprofit organizations
in the service sector. Hence, the museum can
recover the costs of the app increasing the price of
tickets, but not through the selling of the app.
The results show that visitors have considered 4
requirements as attractive. Museums are free to
decide whether to include these requirements in
their apps, as their absence does not decrease the
level of customer satisfaction, their presence would
strongly increase it. This kind of requirements are
useful to differentiate a museum app offer from that
of competitors and to increase the perceived value
of the app. The first attractive requirement is the
description of the museum structure (on the
building, on the architect who designed it, on the
past history, and so on). Another attractive
requirement is the list of the additional services
offered in the museums - such as the presence of a
café, restaurant, museum gift shop, a place for
smokers, toilets – and their localization in the map.
One additional attractive requirement related to the
visit is the suggestion for guided tours. The app
should fulfill information about the guides, their
remuneration, their specialization, their availability
and the possibility to customize the visit to the
museum according to the visitors’ main interests.
The last attractive requirement is the accessibility
from any kind of devices (Mac, Android, and so on)
in order to allow the use of the app by the majority
of users.
Museum should not invest in fulfilling indifferent
requirements because they have not any impact on
customer satisfaction. We found 3 indifferent
requirements. The first of them is the presence of
real time news on new products, such as ongoing
and planned exhibitions, announcements, events,
and artworks temporarily not visible to the public.
Visitors prefer to have only the complete timetable
with scheduled events. The second indifferent
requirement is the presence of explanatory files of
the artworks which deepens the contents of audioguides. Visitors believe that these additional
contents may be excessive and may slow their visit
too much. The last indifferent requirement is the
possibility to put a bookmark on interesting
artworks during the virtual tour. Visitors are not
attracted by this requirement, maybe because it
seems to be too difficult to use, or because they do

According to the results of our study, there are 6
requirements which are considered must-be by
respondents, hence their presence is mandatory. A
museum smart app should always fulfill details
about how to get to the museum (subway, bus, train,
car, taxi), but also contacts of the museum (phone
number, e-mail). Furthermore, a museum app
should include a photo-gallery of the main
important artworks of the museum (in this way the
visitor can view in advance if the museum arouses
his interest or not) and a map of the museum, with
different itineraries and the location of the main
artworks. The last two must-be requirements are
related to the accessibility and usability of the app:
an app for museum should have the multilingual
option in order to allow to different tourists to use it
(usually museums have a high proportion of foreign
visitors) and it also should have a friendly and
efficient user interface, in order to spread the app
also among less experienced users. All these
requirements are mandatory, so their presence is
strongly recommended, otherwise they will cause
high dissatisfaction levels. However their presence
does not increase the level of customer satisfaction
because users take them for granted.
In the study we found 6 one-dimensional
requirements. The presence of these requirements
increases proportionally the level of customer
satisfaction, hence the museum app should hold
them. The first two of them are the time of opening
and closing and the possibility to book and/or
purchase tickets online. They are very important
requirements for people who want to plan in detail
their visit to the museum. Another important
requirement is the presence of an updated timetable
of planned exhibitions, events and tours. This
requirement allows visitors to carefully choose the
day they prefer to visit the museum. One
requirement that is able to increase the pleasure of
the visit at the museum is the possibility to
download audio-guides with detailed information
about each artwork: visitors prefer to hear audioguides in their own devices rather than renting
devices used by many other people. The last two
one-dimensional requirements are related to the
features of accessibility and usability of the smart
app. The first is the availability off-line of the app:
this feature guarantee the possibility to utilize the
app even if the museum does not offer a free Wi-Fi

ISBN: 978-960-474-306-3

163

Recent Advances in Business Management and Marketing

Museum managers should avoid investing resources
in the indifferent requirements—namely real-time
news on new products; explanatory files of the
artworks; virtual tour bookmarks — and must
definitely avoid to waste resources to implement the
reverse requirement: the 3D virtual tour.

not need to use these bookmarks to remember
interesting things to visit.
The only reverse requirement is the opportunity to
take a virtual tour of the museum from the device.
Even if this requirement could give the opportunity
to everyone to visit the museum from their homes,
the majority of respondents did not like this
requisite for two main reasons:
1. The virtual tour could be too heavy and slow
down the application.
2. Visitors think that the virtual tour might ruin the
excitement of the real visit.
Respondents are adverse to the presence of this
requirement, hence the museum should not include
it (also because its cost is very high).

5 Limitations of the study and further
research
Even if we believe our findings are useful to supply
practical suggestions for the design of a mobile app
for museums, we are aware of the limitations of this
research.
The main limit is that our analysis has been
conducted in an underdeveloped region (Sicily is
among the poorest and less developed regions in
EU), where the museums offer is retarded and
undervalued. This may imply that the visitors
interviewed through the questionnaires in the
museums had a low level of expectations, or were
not used to this kind of software (in the case of
Sicilian visitors). However, since our aim was to
find the prerequisites to design a mobile app for
museums our results may be of some interest also
for museums managers and software developers
located in more advanced regions.
The second limit of this study is that our sample was
limited in space and time. If data could be obtained
from a wider range of individuals and places, in a
longer period of time, the results would have been
more significant.
We aim to develop future research by analyzing
museums that already implemented mobile apps, in
order to point out how and if these apps create
greater levels of visitors’ satisfaction.

4.1.2 M>O>A>I rule
The M>O>A>I rule is a hierarchical rule of qualitycategory importance that can be used to design a
product or service. According to that rule, the most
important requirements that cannot be lacking in a
product or service are the must-be requirements,
then the one-dimensional ones, then the attractive
ones, and least importantly, the indifferent
requirements. The M>O>A>I rule can be conceived
as a useful guideline for efficiently directing
investments in order to design the features of a
museum smart app.
By analyzing the results of the evaluation by
frequency and applying the hierarchical rule of
M>O>A>I, some practical indications emerge. If
managers wish to design a museum app according to
visitors’ needs, they will first of all ensure the
presence of the must-be requirements: details on
how to get to the museum; contacts; museum
artworks photo-gallery; museum map; multilingual
option; friendly and efficient user interface.
Once that must-be requirements have been fulfilled,
museum managers should then invest their financial
resources
to
fulfill
the
one-dimensional
requirements previously indicated: time of opening
and closing; tickets booking and/or purchasing;
timetable of planned exhibitions, events and tours;
audio-guides with detailed information about each
artwork; available off-line; free download. The
presence of these features, together with the must-be
requirements, is a necessary condition to ensure the
sufficient level of customer satisfaction.
If additional resources are available, the museum
offer could be enriched by the several attractive
requirements we identified: description of the
museum structure; additional services information
(café, restaurant, museum shop); suggestions for
guided tours; accessibility with any device (Mac,
Android, Windows, etc).

ISBN: 978-960-474-306-3

References:
[1] School of Management del Politecnico di
Milano, Mercati Digitali Consumer e Nuova
Internet, Smau Milan 2012 Conference, Milan,
October 17-19, 2012.
[2] ComScore, 2012 Mobile Future in Focus,
Retrieved
26/03/2013
from
http://www.comscore.com/
[3] Kano N., Seraku N., Takahashi F., Tsuji S.,
Attractive quality and must-be quality,
Hinshitsu: The Journal of the Japanese Society
for Quality Control, Vol.14, No.2, 1984, pp.
39–48.
[4] Kotler P., Marketing Management: Analysis,
Planning, Implementation and Control,
Prentice Hall, 1991.

164

Recent Advances in Business Management and Marketing

Business and Accountancy, Vol.1, No.1, 2010,
pp. 20-31.
[17] Lau P.M., Badaruddin M., Service Quality,
Visitor
Satisfaction
And
Behavioural
Intentions: Pilot Study At A Museum In
Malaysia, Journal of Global Business and
Economics, Vol.1, No.1, 2010, pp. 226-240.
[18] Kuo N.T., Lai C.H., Chang K.C., Cheng Y.S.,
The Critical Service Quality of Museum
Interpretation-A Comparative Study of Tourists
from Mainland China and Taiwan, 2011
International Conference on Management and
Service Science (MASS), 12-14 Aug. 2011, pp.
1-6.
[19] Donald J.G., The Measurement of Learning in
the Museum, Canadian Journal of Education,
Vol.16, No.3, 1991, pp. 371-382.
[20] Rojas M.C., Camarrero M.C., Experience and
Satisfaction of Visitors to Museums and
Cultural Exhibitions, International Review on
Public and Non Profit Marketing, Vol.3, No.1,
2006, pp. 49-65.
[21] Bonacasa N., Il museo online. Nuove
prospettive per la museologia, Digitalia, 2011.
[22] Vom D., Lehn D., Heath C., Accounting for
New Technology in Museum Exhibitions,
International Journal of Arts Management,
Vol.7, No.3, 2005, pp. 11–21.
[23] Hume M., Mills M., Building the sustainable
iMuseum: is the virtual museum leaving our
museums virtually empty?, International
Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector
Marketing, Vol.16, No.3, 2011, pp. 275–289.
[24] Marty P.F., Museum informatics and
collaborative technologies: The emerging
socio-technological dimension of information
science in museum environments, Journal of
the American Society for Information Science,
Vol.50, No.12, 1999, pp. 1083–1091.
[25] Lagrosen S., Online service marketing and
delivery: the case of Swedish museums,
Information Technology & People, Vol.16,
No.2, 2003, pp. 132–156.
[26] Knell S.J., The shape of things to come:
museums in the technological landscape,
Museum and society, Vol.1, No.3, 2003, pp.
132–146.
[27] Nickerson M.F., Online Multimedia museum
exhibits: a case study in technology and
collaboration, Library Hi Tech, Vol.22, No.3,
2004, pp. 270–276.
[28] Lachaud I.C., Passebois J., Do Immersive
Technologies Add Value to the Museumgoing
Experience? An Exploratory Study Conducted
at France’s Paléosite, International Journal of

[5] McLean K., Planning for People in Museum
Exhibitions, Malloy Lithographing, 1996.
[6] McArthur S., Hall C.M., Heritage management
in Australia and New Zealand. The human
dimensions, Oxford University Press, 1996.
[7] Dominici G., Demand Driven Supply Chain ed
Innovazione: il sistema logisitico-produttivo
per la soddisfazione del cliente, In Purpura A.,
Fazio G. (Eds.), Economia e Gestione
dell’Innovazione nelle PMI: Percorsi tematici
ed esperienze formative del Master EGI,
FrancoAngeli, 2008, pp. 100-114.
[8] Dominici G., Palumbo F., Decoding the
Japanese Lean Production System according to
a Viable Systems Perspective, Systemic
Practice and Action Research, online first: doi:
10.1007/s11213-012-9242-z, 2012.
[9] Rowley J., Measuring Total Customer
Experience in Museums, International Journal
of Contemporary Hospitality Management,
Vol.11, No.6, 1999, pp. 303-308.
[10] Goulding C., The Museum Environment and
the Visitor Experience, European Journal of
Marketing, Vol.34, No.3/4, 2000, pp. 261-278.
[11] Gilmore A., Rentschler R., Changes in
Museum Management: A Custodial or
Marketing Emphasis?, Journal of Management
Development, Vol.20, No.10, 2002, pp. 745760.
[12] Phaswana-Mafuya N., Haydam N., Tourists’
Expectations and Perceptions of the Robben
Island Museum – A World Heritage Site,
Journal of Museum Management and
Curatorship, Vol.20, No.2, 2005, pp. 149-169.
[13] Saleh F.A., The Determinants of the Quality of
the Service Experience: An Empirical Study of
a Heritage Park, University of Sharjah Journal
of Pure & Applied Sciences, Vol.2, No.2, 2005,
pp. 75-102.
[14] Hume M., Mort G.S., Winzar H., Exploring
repurchase intention in a performing arts
context: who comes? And why do they come
back?, International Journal of Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol.12, No.2,
2007, pp. 135-148.
[15] Burton C., Louviere J., Young L., Retaining the
visitor, enhancing the experience: identifying
attributes of choice in repeat museum
visitation, International Journal of Nonprofit
and Voluntary Sector Marketing, Vol.14, No.1,
2009, pp. 21-34.
[16] Chan J.K.L., Yeoh E., The Experiential
Dimensions of Museum Experiences: The
Visitors’ Perspectives, International Journal of

ISBN: 978-960-474-306-3

165

Recent Advances in Business Management and Marketing

Arts Management, Vol.11, No.1, 2008, pp. 6071.
[29] Hogsden C., Poulter E.K., The real other?
Museum objects in digital contact networks,
Journal of Material Culture, Vol.17, No.3,
2012, pp. 265-286.
[30] Kotler N., Creativity and Interactivity: New
ways to experience, market and manage
museums, 2003, Retrieved 26/03/2013 from
http://www.fuel4arts.com/files/attach/NeilKotle
r_Museums0404031.pdf
[31] Hawkey
R.,
Learning
with
Digital
Technologies in Museums, Science Centers and
Galleries, Futurelab Series, 2004, Retrieved
from
http://www.futurelab.org.uk/resources/docume
nts/lit_reviews/Museums_Galleries_Review.pd
f.
[32] Yeh J., Lin C., Museum Marketing and
Strategy: Directors’ Perception and Belief,
Journal of the American Academy of Business,
Vol.6, No.2, 2005, pp. 279–284.
[33] Matzler K., Hinterhuber H.H., How to make
product development projects more successful
by integrating Kano’s model of customer
satisfaction into quality function deployment,
Technovation, Vol.18, No.1, 1998, pp. 25–38.

Endnote:
i
To conform with Italian regulations on academic
publishing, even though the article is the joint work
of all authors, we attribute the contribution of each
author as follows: sections 1 and 5 can be credited
to Gandolfo Dominici, section 2 to Gianpaolo
Basile, sections 3 and 4 to Federica Palumbo.

ISBN: 978-960-474-306-3

166

