Accelerat ing t he world's research.

Examining proactiveness and choice
in a location-aware mobile museum
guide
Tsvi Kuflik, Joel Lanir
Interacting with Computers

Cite this paper

Downloaded from Academia.edu 

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of t he best relat ed papers 

Examining Fact ors Influencing t he Disrupt iveness of Not iﬁcat ions in a Mobile Museum Cont ext
Tsvi Kuflik, Joel Lanir

Applying Int errupt Management Concept s in t he Museum
Tsvi Kuflik
T he Influence of a Locat ion-Aware Mobile Guide on Museum Visit ors' Behavior
Tsvi Kuflik

Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Interacting with Computers
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/intcom

Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide
Joel Lanir a,⇑, Tsvi Kuflik a, Alan J. Wecker a, Oliviero Stock b, Massimo Zancanaro b
a
b

Department of Information Systems, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Israel
Fondazione Bruno Kessler (FBK-irst), Trento, Italy

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 14 November 2010
Received in revised form 14 March 2011
Accepted 31 May 2011
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
Amount of information
Choice
Context-aware computing
Cultural heritage
Mobile guide
Proactiveness

a b s t r a c t
Cultural heritage is an area that has recently drawn research attention, especially for exploring ways to
harness novel mobile technologies for supporting visitors. The main benefit of these novel technologies is
their ability to provide personalized, context-aware information services to their users. However, the use
of context-awareness is connected to a fundamental issue of proactiveness – should the system keep the
user in control all the time and only respond to user requests, or should the system take initiative and
propose its services when needed? Proactiveness of mobile visitors’ guides brings with it a possibility
for better service to the user at the cost of taking control out of the user’s hand. The amount of choice
given to visitors is another key issue. With the vast amount of information available for each exhibit,
adaptation of the amount of information by limiting the number of content items, could be warranted
to filter the information according to the visitors needs. However, it is not clear how reducing choice
in terms of the number of content items that are presented to the visitor affects visitor behavior and satisfaction. We examined these issues in a controlled user study conducted with actual museum visitors;
comparing usage, behavior patterns, and attitudes of visitors using three versions of a location-aware
mobile museum guide.
Ó 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Context-aware mobile applications have become common in
our daily lives. These programs and services react to the environment and adapt their behavior to anticipate users’ needs. Dey
and Abowd (2000) define a context-aware system as a system that
‘‘uses context to provide relevant information and/or services to
the user, where relevancy depends on the user’s task’’. Thus, context-aware systems capture contextual attributes (such as the
user’s location and current environment) to better understand
what services or information to provide the users. The presentation
of these services or information brings with it the issue of proactiveness – should the system initiate the presentation of information or should it wait for the user to request information. The first
goal of the present work is to better understand how varying the
level of proactivity in a context-aware system affects users in a real
world scenario, i.e. a location-aware mobile museum guide. The
second goal of this study is to examine the effect that varying
the number of choices has on users. We examine this in terms to
the number of content items provided to users. We examine these
two related issues by empirically comparing different versions of a
location-aware mobile multimedia guide.

⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +972 54 9133993; fax: +972 4 8288181.
E-mail addresses: ylanir@is.haifa.ac.il (J. Lanir), tsvikak@is.haifa.ac.il (T. Kuflik),
ajwecker@gmail.com (A.J. Wecker), stock@fbk.eu (O. Stock), zancana@fbk.eu (M.
Zancanaro).

Dey and Abowd (2000) list three categories of features that
context-aware systems might support: (1) presentation of information and services to the user; (2) automatic execution of a service; and (3) tagging of context to information for later retrieval.
Focusing on the first two, other researchers have also distinguished between systems that passively notify the user of contextual information or services and systems that proactively initiate
services. Barkhuus and Dey (2003) define the first category as passive context-awareness and the second as active context-awareness.
In their example, a mobile phone that automatically changes its
time when the phone enters a new time zone employs active
context-awareness while a phone that prompts the user with
information about the time zone change and lets the user change
the time employs passive context-awareness. Similarly, Tennenhouse (2000) distinguishes between proactive and interactive
computing. Proactive systems use sensors and actuators to
monitor and to shape their surroundings, anticipate users’ needs
and act on their behalf (Want et al., 2003). Interactive systems,
on the other hand, are human-centered and human-controlled.
Schilit et al. (1994) categorize context-aware systems into two
orthogonal dimensions: whether the task at hand is getting information or doing a command, and whether it is done manually or
automatically. In this paper, we follow the definition of Barkhuus
and Dey of active and passive context-awareness, replacing the
term ‘‘active’’ with ‘‘proactive’’ to describe a system that initiates
action, since it better fits our way of initiating information
presentation.

0953-5438/$ - see front matter Ó 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

2

J. Lanir et al. / Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx

Proactiveness simplifying the task while taking control out of
the user’s hand, usually by adapting the user interface according
to the context. However, adaptive user interfaces may violate
many important usability guidelines such as user control, predictability, and transparency (Höök, 2000). Retaining user control over
the system is an important guideline in interactive interfaces. It is
emphasized that most users have strong desire to sense that they
are in charge of the interaction and that the interface responds to
their actions (Shneiderman and Plaisant, 2009; Jameson and
Schwarzkopf, 2006; Norman, 1999). Predictability of the interface
means that it always gives the same response given the same input. Transparency means that the user can understand something
of its inner working. Thus, an important question when designing
context-aware adaptive user interfaces is how much should we
go toward anticipating users needs while taking away control from
the users, and how much control of the interface is better left in the
hands of users.
A possible way of dealing with loss of control in adaptive systems is to give users control over how the system adapts (Jameson
and Schwarzkopf, 2006; Kay, 2001). However, it may be difficult
for the users to understand the adaptivity model and therefore
know how to configure it. Also, few users spare the time to customize their systems, let alone change the adaptivity parameters.
Adaptive systems therefore usually utilize either passive or proactive context-awareness to adapt their interface. To try to maintain
as much user control of the interface as possible, it might be plausible to consider employing passive rather than active contextaware methods. However, maximizing user control in an adaptive
system might not be as important as it seems from the design
guidelines. While users indeed feel a lack of control when using active context-aware systems (Barkhuus and Dey, 2003), many users
prefer active context-aware system because of the benefits that
such systems provide (Barkhuus and Dey, 2003; Jameson and
Schwarzkopf, 2006). Furthermore, users would be more willing
to give up control when the system’s actions are predictable and
transparent (Höök, 2000).
Mobile guides are one of the most commonly used examples
and test-beds to investigate context-aware computing (Dey,
2001). Users of mobile guides move around and are interested in
receiving information that is related to their current location. A
location-aware mobile guide takes into account the visitors’ spatial
location, and adapts its interface in order to provide the visitor
with location-related information (Cheverst et al., 2000; Stock
et al., 2007; Abowd et al., 1997). Adaptation of the user interface
is also often done for personalization purposes. Information presentation can be personalized to suit different types of visitors
according to the specific needs and characteristics of the visitors
such as age, interest, familiarity with the museum, cultural level
and more. Personalizing the information can be achieved using a
user model that represents the user interests and behavior based
on their past interactions with the multimedia guide and on their
past contextual information (Cheverst et al., 2000; Stock et al.,
2007; Kuflik et al., 2011; Petrelli and Not, 2005). Using a user
model in conjunction with the current context, the system can
filter information, and present relevant personalized information
for each location.
One aspect of personalization is the number of content items (or
choices) presented to the user, which usually affects the amount of
information available. Various types of visitors may require different granularity and different amounts of information (Bowen and
Filippini-Fantoni, 2004). For example, a domain expert would probably prefer a guide that provides as much information as possible;
both in depth and breadth. An advantage of a mobile multimedia
guide is its ability to offer visitors access to large amounts of information on every point of interest. However, merely, providing more
choice is not always beneficial. Visitors in museums and cultural

heritage sites can be overwhelmed by the choice of information
available for selection – much of which may be of little interest to
them (Gammon and Burch, 2008). There is only a limited amount
of time available to hold visitor’ attention in the museum and
visitors often do not read all information available, even when it is
relatively short (Serrell, 1997). Personalized guides aim to filter
the information to suit the specific interests of each visitor. However, the number of choices, presented to the visitor, as well as
the quality of the personalization, may affect the way the visitor visits the museum and the overall visitor engagement and satisfaction.
In this study, we examine the issues of proactive vs. passive
context-awareness and choice via number of content items in a
controlled user study. We look at actual usage, user behavior and
users’ attitudes using three versions of a mobile museum guide:
(1) A passive menu-based system that allows visitors to choose
from a list of presentations to view related to an exhibit. (2) A passive simple system that allows visitors to view only one presentation per exhibit, and (3) A proactive system that automatically
presents information (multiple presentations) as the user enters
the vicinity of the exhibit. We conducted the user study in realworld settings in a museum with actual visitors. The paper is structured as follows: in Section 2 we describe the background work
done in relevant areas in context-aware computing and mobile
guide research. Section 3 describes the museum mobile guide
and the three interfaces that we have used in the user study. We
then go on describing the methodology of the user study in Section 4. Section 5 describes the results of the study followed by a
discussion of the results and its limitations in Section 6 and concluding remarks in Section 7.
2. Related work
Table 1 shows a categorization of mobile guides according to
the two main themes of this paper: context awareness (passive
vs. proactive) and amount of content choice the interface provides
(simple vs. multiple). Quadrant I includes guides that have only
one (audio or visual) presentation per location and are not proactive. Most museum audio guides today are of this kind. Quadrant
II includes guides that have a simple interface and are proactive.
Quadrant III includes guides that are more complex in terms of
having more content and therefore offer choice of content and have
passive context-awareness while quadrant IV includes complex
proactive guides. In this paper, we compare interfaces of quadrants
I, III and IV.
2.1. Passive and proactive context-awareness in mobile guides
A location-aware mobile guide is a canonical context-aware
application and is a perfect mean of investigating issues of context-aware applications (Dey, 2001). The users’ location is one of
the most common contextual details to be used to characterize a
person in an interaction (Dey and Abowd, 2000; Want et al.,
Table 1
Mobile guides according to type of context-awareness and number of choices
provided by the guide (area II is not covered in this study).
Context-awareness

Choice
Simple

Multiple

Passive

Proactive

I
Simple guide (audio guides, simple
multimedia guide)

II
Context-aware simple
proactive guide

III
Menu-based Multimedia guide

IV
Proactive multimedia
guide

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

J. Lanir et al. / Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx

2003; Chen and Kotz, 2000). Indeed, most context-aware mobile
guides use location to provide visitors with contextualized information (Cheverst et al., 2000; Abowd et al., 1997; Oppermann
and Specht, 2000; Stock and Zancanaro, 2007; Ghiani et al.,
2009). In many context-aware mobile guides, location is often used
in combination with other forms of context. For example, HyperAudio (Petrelli et al., 2001) uses the amount of time spent in a certain location, knowledge of previous locations, and knowledge
gained from an initial questionnaire to personalize information.
In Cyberguide (Abowd et al., 1997) Knowledge of past locations
was used to provide information in indoor and outdoor settings.
The GUIDE system (Cheverst et al., 2000) provides localized
information according to visitor’s interests, the visitor’s current
location and locations already visited as well as the time of day
and knowledge of opening hours of tourist attractions. In the current study, we use location-awareness as a mean to examine issues
in context-aware applications.
There have been different methods of providing information to
visitors in context-aware guides ranging from passive to active
information provisioning. Systems supporting passive contextaware information services claim that it is important to keep the
visitor in full control of the interface. Systems such as Cyberguide
(Abowd et al., 1997), GUIDE (Cheverst et al., 2000), PIL (Kuflik et al.,
2011) and others use user location information to perform minor
changes in the user interface. The user then interacts with the
interface to request information specific to the location he or she
is at. For example, Hippie (Oppermann and Specht, 2000) signals
the availability of new information by displaying a blinking icon
and playing a short indicator sound alert. Information is then delivered by pressing the icon.
Systems supporting proactive context-aware information services are based on the assumption that in an environment such
as museums, focusing on interacting with the guide’s interface is
contradictory to the experience and relationship with the artifacts
and the environment. Based on their observations that interacting
with technology in the museum is not a favored activity, Petrelli
and Not (2005) stated that in a museum most of the visitor’s attention is devoted to the exhibit and not to the guide system. Interactions with the guide are therefore recommended to be reduced to a
minimum. A guide that automatically decides what to do is therefore expected to have a greater appeal than one that asks for user
assistance. As they point out, this has also been supported in the
evaluation of GUIDE (Cheverst et al., 2000) in which the majority
of users did not want to navigate for information retrieval. The
HyperAudio system (Petrelli et al., 2001) was therefore designed
to support proactive context-awareness by implementing some
reactive components. A general audio commentary was automatically played when a visitor entered a new location. After hearing
the audio commentary, several links to elaborate on the topic were
available on the device for the visitor to actively choose from. Time
spent in a location was also considered. For example, if the presentation has finished and the user has not moved for two seconds
from a location, another presentation automatically started. Similarly, the Ubicicero guide (Ghiani et al., 2009) had an option to proactively start an introductory explanation when users approach an
exhibit, with more information available through the guide’s interface. ec(h)o Wakkary and Hatala, 2006 is another example of a proactive system. During the visit the visitor’s movement creates a
dynamic soundscape of ambient sounds. As the visitor approaches
an exhibit, the soundscapes fades away and the visitor is presented
with three audio prefaces in sequence. The visitor chooses the
audio preface using a wooden cube. The choice for audio preface
is an example of a passive service the ec(h)o system provides,
while the soundscape and the presentation of three audio prefaces
that are being automatically played are examples of active contextawareness. PEACH (Stock et al., 2007) is another example of a

3

system that proactively presents automatically generated adaptive
video documentaries. As visitors first approach a stationary device,
animated characters on the screen initiate a dialog with the visitor.
Similarly, when users approach an exhibit, a presentation automatically starts. However, PEACH used IrDA technology in which the
user actively needs to point the device toward the IR emitter. In
this sense, the user actively requests information similar to a passive context-aware system. LISTEN (Zimmermann and Lorenz,
2008) takes the proactive approach to the extreme. In order for
technology to be invisible to the user, LISTEN users do not directly
interact with a device and carry only headphones. It provides museum visitors with audio presentations, adapted to the user’s context. The visitor moves freely in the museum and once the user
reaches and faces an exhibit, the attached acoustic information
and simulation of a moving sound source is proactively activated.
The only way the visitor can (implicitly) control the audio presentations is by moving or changing head orientation.
2.2. Degrees of choice in mobile guides
Most interface experts advocate designing simple interfaces for
interactive systems in order to enhance system usability because it
may reduce redundant and unnecessary functionality (Nielsen,
1993). This enables users to achieve their goals more efficiently
and effectively, and therefore may enhance their satisfaction. However, there is evidence to believe that users, although it might not
always be in their best interest, prefer having more options and
having more choice (Norman, 2007). In any case, deciding on the
number of content items to provide to users is different than deciding on the interface that presents this information. In a classical
museum guide such as a simple audio guide, the user usually types
in the location and there is only one general explanation on the
specified location. However, one of the benefits of today’s handheld devices is their ability to hold multiple and large amounts
of content for each exhibit. Nevertheless, people cannot cope with
too much information. There is only a limited amount of time
available to hold visitor’ attention in the museum (Serrell, 1997),
and studies have shown that visitors allocate only a few minutes
to each exhibit (Gammon and Burch, 2008). The question then is
how much content, both in terms of choice and volume, should
be provided to the visitor, and how does this affect visitor behavior
(satiation, satisfaction, etc.). Should we provide information to visitors to choose from or should we adapt the guide to provide less,
but personalized and desired information. Many research prototypes today provide multiple information pieces per location
(Cheverst et al., 2000; Stock et al., 2007; Abowd et al., 1997; Kuflik
et al., 2011).
2.3. Comparison of context-aware systems
While various studies examine issues of context-aware computing by examining and evaluating novel context-aware systems
such as novel museum guides, few comparison studies have been
conducted to empirically investigate issues in context-aware systems. Barkhuus and Dey (2003) have examined users’ perception
of context-aware computing systems. They compared between
three types of systems: passive context-awareness, active context-awareness and personalization (in which the user customizes
the interface as needed). They examined users’ responses on ‘pretended’ future services that might exist on a mobile phone that
exemplify aspects of the three conditions. They concluded that
people felt less in control when using context-aware applications.
The more autonomous the service was, the less users felt in control. Participants did not have preference between active and passive context-awareness but preferred both over personalization.
These results should be taken with caution since it is difficult to

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

4

J. Lanir et al. / Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx

conclude actual attitudes using an imaginary approach. These findings are supported by a study conducted by Jameson and Schwarzkopf (2006). In a laboratory study, controlled (similar to passive
context-awareness approach) and automatic (similar to active context-aware approach) adaptation of the user interface were compared to look at how they affect controllability of the interface.
Similar to (Barkhuus and Dey, 2003), they found that in a controlled adaptation the user’s feeling of control with the system
was enhanced. No distinct preference of one interface over the
other was found. Goren-Bar et al. (2006) examined the influence
of personality factors on attitude toward adaptivity in mobile
guides. In a controlled user study, they examined how personality
traits affect attitudes of two systems: (1) a system to which the
human delegates the initiative to the system and presentations
are shown automatically when a user approaches an exhibit and
(2) a system that delegates the initiative to the human, leaving
the human in control via a menu to choose the presentation. They
found that people with internal locus of control have a general
positive attitude towards adaptivity while people with external
locus of control preferred non-adaptive user interfaces. However,
similar to (Barkhuus and Dey, 2003), the study was conducted in
a laboratory setting, and the systems were exemplified with
mock-ups and a ‘pretended’ usage scenario.
As we can see, few studies have compared between different
types of context-aware systems. Even fewer studies have compared different interfaces of mobile guides to see how differences
in interface affect actual user behavior and attitudes. This study
is a first attempt to compare between different types of contextaware systems and different user interfaces of a mobile guide in
a real-world setting. While field evaluations of mobile guides in
real-world settings exist (Cheverst et al., 2000; Aoki et al., 2002),
these evaluations mainly provide feedback and insights on the features used with each guide. By comparing similar versions of the
same guide using the same population in the same environment,
we have maximum control over the examined independent variables. By conducting the experiment in a real-world setting, we
can examine issues of context-awareness that are difficult or too
artificial to examine in a laboratory setting. A real world-setting
also allowed us to examine actual user behavior (not only attitude)
and how it is affected by the intervening factors (i.e. proactiveness
and number of content items).

illustrative graphics using different cinematographic techniques
such as pan, zoom and fade.
Three versions of the user interface adapted from the original
one were designed for the study:
(1) In the menu-based interface, when the visitor approaches an
exhibit she is prompted with a frontal image. Exhibits where
information is available are marked with rectangles (Fig. 1a).
After the visitor chooses an exhibit by pressing the rectangle,
the system presents a list of available presentations concerning the chosen exhibit. The presentations are represented by
questions that aim at initiating a dialogue with the visitor
based on the content of the presentation, and trigger the visitor to think and select the most interesting one to be
answered (Fig. 1b). The visitor can then select and view a
presentation (Fig. 1c).
(2) In the simple interface, when the visitor approaches an exhibit she is prompt with the same image as in the menu-based
interface. However, in the simple interface only one exhibit
(marked by a rectangle) is available per location. Pressing
the exhibit triggers a general presentation on the exhibit
(Fig. 1c). Only one (the general) presentation is available
per location, so step described by Fig. 1b is skipped.
(3) In the proactive interface, when the visitor approaches an
exhibit a presentation automatically starts (Fig. 1c). At the
end of each presentation (as well as during the presentation
itself), the visitor can choose either to continue and view the
next presentation or to stop. Presentations are ordered in
the same order they appear in the list of presentations in
the menu-based interface. After the visitor stops a presentation, or when a visitor returns a second time to the exhibit,
the interface returns to the position illustration screen
(Fig. 1a). From there, the visitor can replay the presentations
in the same sequential order.
In all interfaces, although not explicitly marked so, the first presentation was a general presentation giving general information on
the chosen exhibit. In the menu-based interface, this presentation
was the first in the list, followed by other more specific presentations on relevant topics. In the simple interface, the general presentation was the only one available. In the proactive interface, it
was the first one to be automatically played, while the others were
ordered as they appear in the list in the menu-based interface.

3. The museum guide interface
The study was carried out at the Hecht museum, an established
archaeological museum located at the University of Haifa campus.
The museum offers a number of exhibitions related to the archaeology of University of Haifa going back to 4500 BCE. Participants of
the study were visitors that used the PIL museum guide, a locationaware mobile museum guide providing a personalized multimedia
tour of the Hecht museum. The museum is equipped with a Radio
Frequency (RF) based positioning system based on a wireless sensor network (WSN). Twenty-six locations of interests were covered
by RF-based beacons in the museum in four exhibition rooms providing visitors carrying mobile wearable RF tags with contextual
information seen on their museum guide as soon as they enter
the vicinity of the location. We describe here the basic functionality of museum guide and the three user interfaces used in the
study. For a complete description of The PIL project see (Kuflik
et al., 2011).
The PIL museum guide allows visitors to move freely around the
exhibitions while the system identifies the visitor’s location and
accordingly provides the visitor with relevant information. Information is shown in the form of multimedia presentations, consisting of a narrated text over a set of selected images enhanced with

4. Methodology
4.1. Research questions
The study aimed to comparatively assess the attitudes and
empirically examine system interaction and visit behavior patterns
of museum visitors on two dimensions: proactiveness of the guide
and choice (i.e. the number of content items the guide provides per
exhibit). To examine the differences when users use a proactive vs.
a passive context-aware guide, we compare between the menubased interface and the proactive interface. While we expect that
most users would prefer being in control, we posit that at least
some of them would prefer the proactive interface. We would also
like to examine if the proactiveness of information affect users’
behavior in the museum in terms of time spent at different locations, and number of locations visited. To examine to which extent
people actually benefit from having more choice of information in
the museum, we compare between the simple and the menu-based
interfaces. We are interested in looking at how visitors use more
information, and how providing more information to visitors affects their visit.

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

J. Lanir et al. / Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx

5

Fig. 1. The museum guide interface. In the menu-based interface, when the visitor arrives to a new position, the system provides the relevant position illustration. After
choosing an exhibit, a list of questions about the exhibit is presented. The visitor then chooses a question which triggers a multimedia presentation related to the question.

Our main research questions were:
a. Would visitors feel less ‘‘in control’’ when using a proactive
context-aware interface than when using a passive contextaware interface?
b. In general, would users prefer the menu-based interface
guide that leaves them in control and provides more
information?
c. Would users’ visit behavior be affected by the interface they
used, especially when comparing the menu-based interface
with the simple interface?
d. Would first time visitors prefer the simple interface in which
there is only a general explanation of each location, while
returning visitors of the Hecht museum prefer the menubased interface which provides more choice of information?
4.2. Experimental design
The study design was a between-subject design in which each
participant used one interface only. We had three study groups
according to the three types of interfaces that were used as described in Section 3. The main variable examined was interface
type: Menu-based, simple and proactive.
4.3. Procedure
Visitors of the Hecht museum were approached at the entrance
of the museum and were invited to participate in our user study.
Participants were offered the free use of the mobile museum visitor’s guide. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
three study groups and were given the corresponding mobile
guide. They were first given a short explanation on how to use
the guide and were then asked to visit the museum on their own
pace, using the guide as they wished. Locations in the museum
on which information was available in the mobile guide were
clearly marked. Upon finishing the visit, visitors were asked to fill
a short questionnaire regarding their experience. Visitors were
then shown the other two interfaces (the ones that they have not
used) and were asked to rate which interface they preferred: the
one that they used or the alternative one as shown and explained
to them. In addition, log files with detailed information of the visits
were recorded.

events during the visit. These tools correspond to measuring visitors’ attitudes and measuring visitors’ behaviors, both often measured in museum studies (Bitgood, 2009).
The questionnaire was divided into three parts: The first part of
the questionnaires consisted of general demographic information.
The second part asked about participants’ attitude toward a number of constructs. Questionnaire constructs were operationalized
using multiple items that participants scaled. Most items but one
consisted of statements to which participants expressed their
agreement on a 7-point Likert scale to indicate how much they
agreed with each statement, ranging from strongly disagree (1)
to strongly agree (7). The only exception was the perceived control
construct which was used by Pianesi et al. (2009) and taken from
Novak et al. (2003). This consisted of semantic differential items
in which participants were asked to scale their attitude toward
the guide from one extreme to the other (1 if they felt dominant,
7 if the felt submissive). Two items were inverted (‘‘It was difficult
to understand how to use the guide’’) to avoid having automatic
answers. However, when reporting the results, we inverted them
back to simplify the readability of the results. Most of the constructs were taken from Pianesi et al. (2009) who gathered them
from different sources and adapted most of them for the museum
environment. Additional constructs that we believed could be affected by the interface type were added. Table 2 shows the different constructs used in the study along with references to their
sources when available. Because visitor’s time filling the questionnaire was limited (due to using actual visitors), we used simplified
versions for most of these constructs which included one or two
items only for each construct. An exception for this was the construct of control. Because we felt that control is an important construct that might be related to interface type, especially with
respect to the proactive interface, we decided to redundantly
examine it both with a statement (the control construct in Table 1)
and with the semantic differential items used at (Novak et al.,
2003) and (Pianesi et al., 2009).
Visit logs were used to unobtrusively assess participants’
behavior using the guide in the museum. The number of locations
visited and time spent in each of the locations was recorded by the
positioning system. All interactions with the guide including
selecting and listening to a presentation, stopping a presentation,
giving feedback to a presentation’s quality, etc., were recorded in
the museum guide’s server as log events in system logs and later
analyzed.

4.4. Measures
4.5. Participants
For analyzing and evaluating visit experience, we used two
complementary tools: a questionnaire that the visitors filled at
the end of the visit and logs of the visit where the system logged

Participants were regular museum visitors. Because we thought
that a minimum time is required to properly experience the

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

6

J. Lanir et al. / Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx
Table 2
Questionnaire scales.
Construct

Reference

Items

Intention of use
Satisfaction

Davis, 1989
Bailey and Pearson, 1983

I would like to use such a guide in future visits
I was discontent with the usage of the mobile guide
Using the guide helped improve my museum experience

Effect on visit time
Usefulness
Number of content items

Davis, 1989

Using the guide caused me to extend my visit time
The guide was useful for me during the visit
I would prefer getting more presentations in each location
I would prefer that there would be less content in the guide

Learning
Ease of use

Using the guide made me learn about the exhibits more than a visit without a guide
Davis, 1989

It was difficult to understand how to use the guide
Using the guide was easy and intuitive

Novak et al., 2003

Dominant/submissive
Influenced/influential
Guided/autonomous

Control
Perceived control

During the visit I felt that I control what I see and hear

Table 3
Number of times participants have visited cultural heritage sites in the last year.
Times in CH sites in the last year

Number of responses

0
1
Between 2 and 5
Between 6 and 10
More

4
8
29
10
6

system, only participants who used the guide for at least 30 min
were included in the study. A total of sixty-one (61) visitors that
matched this criterion participated in the study out of a total of
65 that used the system. Four (4) visitors out of the 61 did not fill
in the questionnaires at the end (for various reasons, the main one
being they were in a hurry to go elsewhere). We included these visitors in our log analysis because although not filling out the questionnaires, their system usage and visit behavior is still valid.
Therefore, the log analysis included 61 participants (menu-based:
21, proactive: 20 and simple: 20), while the questionnaire analysis
included 57 participants (menu-based: 19, proactive: 19 and simple: 19).
Out of the 57 participants 30 were males and 27 were females.
The age of the visitors ranged from 18 to 76 with an average of
41.1 years (SD = 18.6). Twenty-one (21) of the visitors have visited
the Hecht museum before while for 36 it was their first visit. Most
visitors were interested in archeology (m = 5.39; SD = 1.3 on a
7-point Likert scale asking about interest in archeology). Table 3 presents the distribution of responses to the number of times visitors
visited in cultural heritage sites. As can be seen, most participants
indicated they have visited two or more sites. Only four have visited
none. Answering about experience with technology in museums,
most of the visitors rated a medium to low level of experience with
audio guides in museum (m = 3.05; SD = 1.17 on a 7-point Likert
scale), and even lower level of knowledge of multimedia guides
(m = 2.5; SD = 1.34) or multimedia stations (m = 2.83; SD = 1.34).
5. Results
We first report on the analysis of system usage and user
behavior in the museum stemming from the log visits data. We
then report on results of visitors’ attitudes as analyzed from the
questionnaires.
5.1. Visitor behavior analysis
For most of the analyses in this section we performed a
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with interface type

(menu-based, proactive, simple) as the between-subjects variable.
Whenever ANOVA resulted in significant F-values (p < 0.05), a post
hoc analysis using the Bonferroni adjustment was conducted to see
from which pairs this result stemmed from. In addition to reporting statistical significance we report effect size, partial eta-squared
(g2), which is a measure of the magnitude of the effect of a difference that is independent of sample size. Landauer (1997) notes
that effect size is often more appropriate than statistical significance in applied research in Human–Computer Interaction. The
metric for interpreting eta-squared is: .01 is a small effect, .06 is
medium, and .14 is large.
5.1.1. Total visit time
The total visit time varied with a minimum visit time of
30.7 min and a maximum visit time of 200.2 min. The average visit
time was 52.3 min (SD = 28.0 min). No significant effect was found
for interface type on total time spent in the museum.
5.1.2. Total number of presentation seen
Fig. 2 presents the number of presentations seen per interface
type. Because visit time varied widely between visitors, we normalized results over time in respect to a 1-h visit. To examine
the effect of interface type on number of presentations seen, we
performed a one-way ANOVA with interface type (menu, proactive,
simple) as an independent variable. No significant differences were
found, F(2, 59) = 1.72, p = 0.227. Visitors that used the menu-based
interface (m = 17.0) and visitors that used the proactive interface
(m = 17.9) have seen slightly more presentations per hour than visitors that used the simple interface (m = 14.7).
5.1.3. Number of locations visited
Fig. 3 shows the total number of locations visited for each interface type. On the bottom (in blue) we see the total number of locations in which visitors have seen presentations in. Added to that on
the top (in red) are the locations in which visitors were detected in,
but did not view a presentation. For visitors using the proactive
interface, the presentation automatically started as they were detected in a location, and therefore for them, the total number of
locations visited was equal to the number of locations with presentations viewed.
Looking at the total number of locations with viewed presentations (in blue), visitors who used the simple interface visited more
locations than visitors who used the proactive systems who visited
more locations than visitors who used the menu-based interface.
This effect was significant, F(2, 59) = 5.42, p = 0.008, g2 = 0.16.
Post-hoc analysis using the Bonferroni adjustment indicates significant difference for number of locations visited between the simple
and the menu-based groups. Visitors using the simple interface

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

J. Lanir et al. / Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx

7

the proactive group were stopped in the first 10 s of the
presentation.

Fig. 2. Number of presentations seen per interface normalized over a 1-h visit. Error
bars display 95% confidence interval.

Fig. 3. Total number of locations with and without presentations viewed. Error bars
display 95% confidence interval of total number of location visited.

have been in significantly more locations (m = 15.21) than visitors
using the menu-based interface (m = 9.76), p = 0.015. Differences
between the simple and proactive groups (m = 13.85) were not significant. Looking at the total number of locations in which visitors
were detected it (blue + red), significant results were found indicating a main effect of interface type on number of locations,
F(2, 59) = 3.54, p = 0.021, g2 = 0.11. Post-hoc analysis indicates significant difference between the simple and the menu-based groups
and between the simple and the proactive groups. Visitors using
the simple interface have been in significantly more locations in
(m = 19.2) than visitors using the proactive interface (m = 13.85),
p = 0.023, or visitors using the menu-based interface (m = 14.04),
p = 0.002.

5.1.4. Stopped presentations
It is interesting to look at the number of presentations per hour
that were stopped by visitors using each interface (i.e. – the visitor
has pressed the stop button before the end of the presentation).
There was a strong main effect for interface type on stopped presentations, F(2, 59) = 15.47, p < 0.001, g2 = 0.34. Post-hoc analyses
indicate that participants in the proactive group (m = 6.10) stopped
more presentations than both the menu-based (m = 2.50), p < 0.001
and the simple (m = 1.33), p < 0.001 groups. This difference in
stopped presentations between visitors using the proactive and
the menu-based interfaces can help to explain the difference in
number of locations with presentations viewed as seen in Fig. 3:
although using the proactive interface, visitors were in more locations with viewed presentations, they immediately stopped many
of these presentations. Indeed, 40.9% of stopped presentations in

5.1.5. Average time in a location
Fig. 4 shows the average time spent in a location per interface
type. Visitors using the menu-based interface (m = 131.0 s) spent
on average more than visitors who used the proactive system
(m = 103.2) that spent on average more time in a location than visitors who used the simple interface (m = 85.3 s). To examine the effect of interface type on average time in a location, we performed a
one-way ANOVA with interface type as a between-subject variable.
Results indicated a significant effect of interface type on time in
location, F(2, 59) = 4.856, p = 0.011, g2 = 0.14. Post-hoc analysis
using the Bonferroni adjustment indicates significant difference
between the menu-based and the simple groups. Visitors using
the menu-based interface stayed on average significantly longer
in a location than visitors using the simple interface, p = 0.003.
Post-hoc analysis of pro-active vs. menu-based yielded marginally
significant results, p = 0.069. It is interesting to note that the standard deviation of the menu-based condition’s average time in a
location is approximately twice as much (SD = 28.3) as the proactive (SD = 15.3) or the simple (SD = 14.0) conditions. This may suggest that average time in a location for visitors using the menubased interface varied widely between visitors who stayed long
periods of times in locations and visitors who stayed for shorter
periods. We examine this further when we look at first time vs.
returning visitors.
5.1.6. Feedback
Participants were asked to provide feedback after each presentation seen. Feedback was elicited using a dedicated screen that
appeared after each presentation and asked participants to rate
how much they liked the content and relevance of each presentation. Feedback was given on 5-point scale that was marked by a
smiley face to be pressed if the presentation was liked or a sad face
if the presentation was deemed bad. The buttons were then translated to a scale of 2 (dislike) to +2 (like). In general, visitors liked
the presentations. The average feedback given was 1.13
(SD = 0.41). Not surprisingly (because ratings were given on the
quality of the presentations themselves, which were the same in
each interface), there was no significant difference between the
groups concerning the feedback to the presentations,
F(2, 59) = 0.070, p = NS.
5.1.7. Presentations per location
On average, visitors using the menu-based interface watched
2.31 presentations per location. Visitors using the proactive interface watched 2.05 presentations per location. Analysis of the difference between these two versions did not yield a significant
difference, F(1, 40) = 0.61, p = NS. In the case of the simple

Fig. 4. Average time in seconds spent in a location per interface type. Error bars
display 95% confidence interval.

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

8

J. Lanir et al. / Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx

interface, where only one presentation was available per location,
visitors watched on average 1.1 presentations per location. This
is slightly higher than one due to some people seeing the same
presentation twice.
5.1.8. Menu choosing patterns
To better compare between the menu-based and the proactive
interfaces, we wanted to understand the ‘‘choosing patters’’ –
how visitors choose presentations when they used the menu-based
interface. For example, do visitors always choose the first item first
and then continue on sequentially (and then our proactive interface would make more sense), or maybe their choice of items is different. Results of the analysis indicate that in 71.3% of the cases,
visitors have chosen the first presentation when arriving to a
new location. Fig. 5 shows the distribution of presentations chosen
in the menu-based interface according to their order in the menu.
As can be seen, most presentations chosen were either in the first,
second, or third position. This is explained by the fact that there
were three menu items per screen, so item #4 starts on the second
screen. Only 7 of the 20 participants went beyond the first screen
to choose a presentation. This is similar to Web-based search in
which it is reported that over 75% of the searches do not go beyond
the first page results (Jansen and Spink, 2006).
5.2. Visitors’ attitude
Following the visit, we presented visitors with a set of statements and asked them to use a 7-point Likert scale to indicate
how much they agreed with each statement, ranging from strongly
disagree (1) to strongly agree (7). Table 4 shows these statements
and visitors’ responses. With ranked ordinal data and a relatively
small sample size it is recommended to use a non-parametric
statistical test (Huck et al., 1974). We therefore used the
Kruskal–Wallis non-parametric test to examine differences in
ranking between the groups, followed by post hoc Mann–Whitney
U tests for pair-wise comparisons.
As can be seen in Table 4, visitors that used the simple interface
preferred getting more content (m = 6.05) over those that used the
menu-based or the proactive interfaces. These differences were
significant, H(2) = 6.78, p = 0.034. Post-hoc analysis made with
the Mann–Whitney U test reveal that the simple interface had
higher ratings than that of the proactive (U = 116, p = 0.007) or
the menu-based (U = 118, p = 0.046). The meaning is that while
the menu-based interface and the proactive interface provided
additional content and satisfied the visitors, the simple interface

Fig. 5. Distribution of menu item pressed according to order presented (only in the
menu-based condition). There were three items per page.

did not do that, resulting in a higher ranking for the need of additional content items.
The different interfaces differed significantly on the reported
control of the visitors, H(2) = 7.29, p = 0.026. Post-hoc analysis with
the Mann–Whitney U test showed that this difference stems from
participants that used the proactive interface rating the feeling of
being in control significantly lower than those who used the
menu-based interface (U = 85, p = 0.009) and those who used the
simple interface (U = 107, p = 0.048).
The perceived control showed significant values for the submissive/dominant, H(2) = 7.45, p = 0.024, and guided/autonomous,
H(2), p = 0.022, scales. In the submissive/dominant scale post hoc
analysis revealed a significant difference between the menu-based
and the proactive interfaces (U = 74, p = 0.005), indicating that participants felt relatively more dominant using the menu-based
interface and more submissive using the proactive interface. In
the guided/autonomous scale post hoc analyses showed a significant difference between the menu-based and the proactive interfaces (U = 67, p = 0.007), indicating that participants using the
menu-based interface felt more autonomous than participants
using the proactive interface (who felt more guided). It is interesting to visually compare these three scales side by side (Fig. 6). We
see that in all four statements, the proactive interface was perceived as allowing the least control. The simple interface scored
higher than the proactive interface in all four statements. Interestingly, we see that the simple interface scored lower in all statements than the menu-based interface, meaning that visitors
perceived to have less control in the simple interface than in the
menu-based interface. We should be cautious here: although this
seems like a trend that spanned all four statements, no significant
differences were identified between the simple and menu-based
interfaces, or between the simple and proactive interfaces other
than in the control statement.
5.2.1. First-time vs. returning visitors
We looked at the differences between visitors who previously
visited the Hecht museum and first-time visitors, to examine the
difference in attitudes toward the museum guide. We hypothesized that returning visitors (visitors who already visited the Hecht
museum), who are usually more interested in archeology, would
prefer the menu-based or proactive interfaces rather than the simple one. We also hypothesized that first-time visitors of the Hecht
museum, would prefer the simple guide that provides only general
information for each location.
We first examined the general effect of first-time visit (yes/no)
over the different constructs. Results of the analysis revealed significant differences between returning and first-time visitors on
two measures. Returning visitors rated significantly higher on the
intention-of-use (they would like to use such a guide in the future)
scale (m = 6.57) than first-time visitors (m = 5.68), U = 251,
p = 0.030. Returning visitors also rated significantly higher on user
satisfaction (m = 6.35) than first-time visitors (m = 5.28), U = 211,
p = 0.009, indicating they were more satisfied with the guide than
the first-time users.
To examine our hypothesis that visitors with experience would
prefer the menu-based interface while first-time visitors would
prefer the simple interface we looked at the interaction of visitexperience and group. A significant interaction effect would indicate that the effect of experience on attitudes differs depending
on the interface used. This is necessary to support our hypothesis.
However, no interaction effect was found for the examined constructs on visit-experience and group. We therefore cannot conclude that differences in experience affect attitudes toward the
guide interface.
Finally, we compared visit behavior patterns of first-time and
returning visitors. Results indicate that on average, returning

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

9

J. Lanir et al. / Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx

Table 4
Visitors’ average ratings (and standard deviation) per interface group (menu, proactive, simple) on a 7-point Likert scale of the different constructs listed in Table 2. Kruskal–
Wallis p-values are shown in the ‘‘significant’’ column (N = 57).
Construct

Menu-based

Proactive

Simple

Significant (p)

Intention of use
Satisfaction
Effect on visit time
Usefulness
Number of content items – prefer to have more items
Number of content items – prefer to have less items
Learning
Ease of use
Control
Perceived control: submissive/dominant
Influenced/influential
Guided/autonomous

6.10
5.77
5.15
5.66
4.67
2.47
6.10
5.23
5.90
4.00
4.05
5.33

6.00
5.59
5.81
5.56
4.62
2.06
5.75
4.90
4.50
2.87
3.31
3.56

5.95
5.69
5.42
6.14
6.05
2.00
6.00
5.09
5.57
3.47
3.84
4.47

NS
NS
NS
NS
p = 0.034
NS
NS
NS
p = 0.026
P = 0.024
NS
p = 0.022

(1.44)
(1.34)
(2.11)
(1.52)
(1.79)
(1.80)
(0.85)
(1.74)
(1.09)
(1.02)
(1.39)
(1.32)

(1.36)
(1.64)
(1.87)
(1.67)
(2.27)
(1.38)
(1.73)
(1.65)
(1.71)
(1.02)
(1.35)
(1.99)

(1.53)
(1.35)
(1.87)
(1.52)
(1.07)
(1.51)
(2.00)
(1.54)
(1.24)
(1.66)
(1.34)
(1.83)

Fig. 7 displays the aggregated results disregarding the knowledge of which interface each visitor used. We see that generally,
visitors preferred the menu-based interface over both the simple
and the proactive interfaces. Direct preference between the simple
and the proactive interfaces is not clear from the results. However,
we should look at these results warily. Because of our betweensubject methodology, visitors experienced only one interface,
while the other interfaces were demonstrated to them. This makes
it difficult for visitors to actually assess their full interaction with
the interfaces they have not used.

6. Discussion

Fig. 6. Subjective ratings of the control statements for the different study groups.

visitors spent more time per location (m = 128.7) than first time
visitors (m = 95.18), F = 5.98, p = 0.018, g2 = 0.10. Returning visitors
also visited fewer locations per hour (m = 17.7) compared to first
time visitors (m = 14.5) although these results were only marginally significant, F = 2.82, p = 0.087.

5.2.2. Preference of interface
In order to elicit visitor preference, after participants finished
filling the questionnaire we demonstrated them the interfaces they
have not used. For example, if a participant has used the menubased interface during her visit, we showed her the proactive
and the simple interfaces and asked her two questions: did she
prefer the interface she used (menu) or the simple interface, and
did she prefer the interface she used or the proactive interface.
Table 5 shows results of preferences in terms of how many visitors
preferred each interface compared to the one they used.

We found that users’ feel of control decreased as the proactiveness and the autonomy of the system increased. This supports previous works who found similar attitudes toward proactiveness
(Barkhuus and Dey, 2003; Cheverst et al., 2001). This is not surprising. In the proactive interface, presentations start automatically as
the visitor approaches a location, taking some control away from
the visitor. This decreased feeling of control, however did not affect
visitors’ satisfaction, intention to use the system, or other subjective opinions of the system on which reported ratings did not differ
between interfaces. Indeed, Bailey and Pearson (1983) examining
the effect that 36 different factors had on user satisfaction found
feeling of control to be one of the least important factors affecting
user satisfaction. Nevertheless, when examining visit behavior, we
found that more presentations were stopped with the proactive
interface compared to the two other interfaces. Looking at the
number of locations visited (Fig. 3), we see that with the menubased and simple interfaces, users did not view presentations in
every location. There were locations in which visitors visited yet
chose not to use the guide in. It is likely that the difference in
stopped presentations stem from these type of locations. The proactive guide caused presentations to start automatically as soon as
the visitor enters the location area. In a museum scenario, a visitor

Table 5
Preference data. Each cell displays the results of the comparison (in terms of number of people preferring) of the guide
visitors used vs. an alternative guide (N = 57).
Guide used

Compared to
Menu-based

Simple

Menu-based (n = 19)

–

Menu
17

Simple (n = 19)

Simple
5

Menu
14

–

Proactive (n = 19)

Proactive
6

Menu
13

Proactive
9

Proactive
Simple
2

Simple
10

Menu
15

Proactive
4

Simple
7

Proactive
12

–

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

10

J. Lanir et al. / Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx

Fig. 7. Subjective comparisons between interfaces. Visitors were asked to choose
which interface they prefer: the one they used or the alternative interfaces.

might approach a new location and first wish to examine the artifact, read the labels, continue a talk with a friend, or simply pass
by. The immediate triggering of information solely according to
location may therefore not always be preferred. Hence, when using
proactivity with a mobile guide, a more subtle approach than the
one used in this study might be preferred. For example, proactivity
can be used to trigger engagement and awareness of the location
by a short message (instead of a long presentation) followed by
more information that requires user interaction if the user wishes
to continue, similar in approach to that taken in Ghiani et al.
(2009), Petrelli et al. (2001). Alternatively, other types of contextaware information other than location (e.g. knowledge of when
the user is talking) might be used to better understand when to
utilize proactiveness.
The number of content items (or number of choices) presented
to visitors greatly affected their visit behavior patterns in the museum. When receiving less information, visitors spent less time in
each location but visited more locations. When receiving more
information and being able to choose what to view, visitors visited
fewer locations yet spent more time in each location. However,
there was no significant difference between the total number of
presentations seen in the different groups. It seems that in general,
visitors have a set amount of content that they view during their
visit time. Changing the number of content items per location,
thereby changing the amount of content, simply changed their
behavior and movement in the museum. This has strong implications for designers of mobile guides, museum curators and
museum content providers. Designing a system with less information per location, (e.g. a simple audio guide), may cause visitors to
get a wider, broader view of the museum. On the other hand,
allowing more information using a more sophisticated guide,
may allow visitors to get more in-depth information on specific
locations, at expense of the broader view. Moreover, this may serve
as a trigger for returning visits in the future. When personalizing
the interface, designers first need to understand the broader motivations and goals of the visitor, in terms of depth vs. breadth of visit, and accordingly decide on how many content items to present.
Regarding the optimal number of choices in an interface, our results are not conclusive. We have shown that the number of
choices given affects behavior, but it is difficult to set rules for an
ideal number of choices. We estimate that this number would depend on many factors including type of visitor (i.e. how the visitor
visits the museum, see (Falk and Dierking, 1992) for example of
visitor types), personal characteristics of the visitor (Goren-Bar
et al., 2006), other interface characteristics, the specific museum
setting and more. Further research would be needed to examine

variables that affect ideal amount of choice. Deciding how to divide
a set amount of content, that is whether to prefer numerous short
items over fewer lengthier items, is also subject to future research.
We hypothesized that First-time visitors would prefer the simple interface over the other interfaces since first-time visitors are
often not interested in details and prefer general information (Petrelli and Not, 2005). Similarly, we hypothesized that returning visitors would prefer the menu-based interface. Our results did not
provide significant results to support this hypothesis. However,
our results revealed two other interesting findings. First, results
showed that returning visitors rated the guide higher on satisfaction and intention to use the guide in the future than first-time visitors. While unexpected, this could be explained by the fact that
returning visitors have already been in the museum without the
guide and therefore have a higher appreciation of its advantages.
Second, our results indicated that returning visitors spent more
time per exhibit than first-time visitors. Returning visitors also visited fewer locations than first-time visitors (although this was only
marginally significant). According to Falk and Dierking (1992), the
main difference between first-time and returning visitors’ behavior
is a long ‘‘cruising’’ period that usually consumes the greatest portion of first-time visitors’ time in the museum. For many first-time
visitors, seeing the entire museum is a significant part of the
museum agenda. Therefore, in the ‘‘cruising’’ period the visitor
skims the contents and rapidly moves through the exhibitions
occasionally stopping on a point of interest. Returning visitors,
on the other hand, know what they want to see and do not feel
compelled to view the entire museum in one visit (Falk and
Dierking, 1992), pp. 58–62]. It is therefore reasonable that firsttime visitors because of the ‘‘cruising’’ period, stayed a shorter time
per location in order to be able to view the entire museum. This
may indicate that first-time visitors indeed use the guide to get a
more ‘‘broader’’ view of the museum, while returning visitors use
it for an ‘‘in-depth’’ view of locations, similar to the differences
observed between the usage of the menu-based and the usage of
the simple interfaces.
Both the proactive and the simple interfaces provide an alternative to the more ‘‘conventional’’ approach (the menu-based interface) that leaves the visitor in control and provides the visitor
with all the options to choose from. In a sense, they are providing,
each from a different perspective, simpler interaction means with
the guide by reducing choice and complexity. The simple interface
simplifies the interaction by providing less choice. The proactive
interface provides simplified interaction by automating the initiation of actions and by sequencing the order of presentations. However, this reduction of choice was not liked by most visitors who
preferred the menu-based interface over the other two. A possible
explanation is that people often prefer a more complex interface
with more choice options, even if they do not necessarily need
these options. Studies have shown that although complex interfaces might overcomplicate users’ tasks, people usually prefer
them over simper ones (Norman, 2007).
The objective of this study was not to evaluate the three specific
designs but rather we used the three prototypes as a way to compare the two broad paradigms of pro-activeness and choice. Nevertheless, we think that our study may also contribute to highlight
some implications for the design of mobile multimedia presentations in the museum setting. We have discussed above that the
menu interface makes visitors see less locations while exposing
them to more presentations. If the goal of a guide is to foster learning, the menu interface might be the one to better achieve this
goal. Similarly, if the goal of the guide is to get an overview or general knowledge of the museum, the simple interface would be best.
The proactive version might be best for visitors who wish to have
an ambient experience and do not wish to handle the guide’s interface. However, for many visitors, the feeling of losing control

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

J. Lanir et al. / Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx

observed when using the proactive interface may eventually reduce the quality of experience which is an important component
of a museum visit.
One possibility to resolve the decision of which interface to provide each visitor with is to allow the visitor to choose his or her
interface. Technically, this is possible by implementing all interfaces and allowing the visitor to choose between interfaces from
a configuration or setting screen. However, users do not always
know ahead of time which interface they would prefer, and do
not always understand the model of the configuration (Kay,
2001). Furthermore, few users spare the time to customize their
systems especially with systems such as museum mobile guides
which are often used for only one session. Another possibility is
to have the system decide which interface to offer to a particular
user based on the characterization of the user and situation. This
can be based on explicit user feedback (stating the type of visit
rather than choosing an interface) or implicit system
understanding.
Finally, we would like to reflect on the methodology we have
chosen. Performing the user study in a real world setting posed
some constraints on what we could and could not do. For example,
because we used real visitors we had to keep the questionnaire
short so visitors would be able to complete it within five minutes.
Specifically, we did not include the locus of control questionnaire
that includes 13 items. The results of Goren-Bar et al. (2006) show
that the attitude toward an adaptation may depend on the personality traits of the specific visitor rather than being a generic disposition. Adding this questionnaire could have given us information
whether personality traits might also affect the type of contextawareness and personalization of content used. Performing the
study with actual visitors also forced us to perform a between-subject design which limited our information of user preference and
made it more difficult to reach results that have statistical
significance.

7. Conclusions
As location-aware applications on mobile devices become more
popular, researchers need to better understand how to design such
applications in order to best provide information and services to
their users. This study examined two major issues related to location-aware systems: proactiveness and choice (via the number of
content items provided) using as a testbed three types of systems:
simple, menu-based, proactive. To date, comparison between proactive and passive interfaces has been largely theoretical. This
study allowed us to compare these design alternatives in the
context of an actual software application with users carrying out
normal tasks in a real-world environment.
Revisiting our research questions, results indicate that (a)
Visitors felt less in control when using the proactive interface
than when using a passive context-aware interface. (b) In general, users preferred the menu-based interface guide. (c) Users
visit behavior was affected by the interface they used, specifically, visitors receiving less content choice visited more locations
and spent less time in a location than visitors that receive more
content choice. Thus the number of choices of content items may
therefore be correlated with the depth of the learning experience
of the user. (d) Results do not indicate an effect of experience of
visitors on preference of interface. However, results indicate that
returning visitors appreciate the guide more and spent more
time per exhibit than first-time visitors. Returning visitors also
visited fewer locations than first-time visitors. These trends suggest that returning visitors’ use the guide for an ‘‘in-depth’’ view
while first-time visitor use the guide to get a ‘‘broader’’ view of
the museum.

11

Future research may focus on identifying different types of visitors, their preferences and needs and try and suggest an ‘‘optimal’’
number of presentations offered to them, as well as the preferred
duration of the presentations.

References
Abowd, G.D., Atkeson, C.G., Hong, J., et al., 1997. Cyberguide: a mobile contextaware tour guide. Wireless Networks 3, 421–433.
Aoki, P.M., Grinter, R.E., Hurst, A., Szymanski, M.H., Thornton, J.D., Woodruff, A.,
2002. Sotto voce: exploring the interplay of conversation and mobile audio
spaces. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems: Changing Our World, Changing Ourselves, pp. 438–
446.
Bailey, J.E., Pearson, S.W., 1983. Development of a tool for measuring and analyzing
computer user satisfaction. Manage. Sci. 29, 530–545.
Barkhuus, L., Dey, A., 2003. Is context-aware computing taking control away from
the user? Three levels of interactivity examined. Ubicomp 2003. Ubiquitous
Comput., 149–156.
Bitgood, S., 2009. Museum fatigue: a critical review. Visitor Studies 12, 93–111.
Bowen, J.P., Filippini-Fantoni, S., 2004. Personalization and the web from a museum
perspective. Museums Web, 63–78.
Chen, G., Kotz, D., 2000. A survey of context-aware mobile computing research.
Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Mitchell, K., Friday, A., 2000. Experiences of developing and
deploying a context-aware tourist guide: the GUIDE project. In: Proceedings of
the 6th annual international conference on mobile computing and networking,
pp. 20–31.
Cheverst, K., Mitchell, K., Davies, N., 2001. Investigating context-aware information
push vs. information pull to tourists. In: Proceedings of Mobile HCI.
Davis, F.D., 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance
of information technology. MIS Quart. 13, 319–340.
Dey, A.K., 2001. Understanding and using context. Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 5,
4–7.
Dey, A.K., Abowd, G.D., 2000. Towards a better understanding of context and
context-awareness, CHI 2000 workshop on the what, who, where, when, and
how of context-awareness, pp. 1–6.
Falk, J.H., Dierking, L.D., 1992. The museum experience. Howells House.
Gammon, B., Burch, A., 2008. Designing Mobile Digital Experiences. Digital
Technologies and the Museum Experience: Handheld Guides and Other
Media, p. 35.
Ghiani, G., Paterano, F., Santoro, C., et al., 2009. UbiCicero: a location-aware, multidevice museum guide. Interact. Comput. 21, 288–303.
Goren-Bar, D., Graziola, I., Pianesi, F., et al., 2006. The influence of personality factors
on visitor attitudes towards adaptivity dimensions for mobile museum guides.
User Model. User-Adapt. Interact. 16, 31–62.
Höök, K., 2000. Steps to take before intelligent user interfaces become real. Interact.
Comput. 12, 409–426.
Huck, S.W., Cormier, W.H., Bounds Jr., W.G., 1974. Reading Statistics and Research.
HarperCollins Publishers.
Jameson, A., Schwarzkopf, E., 2006. Pros and cons of controllability: an empirical
study. Adapt. Hypermedia Adapt. Web-based Syst., 193–202.
Jansen, B.J., Spink, A., 2006. How are we searching the world wide web? A
Comparison of Nine Search Engine Transaction Logs. Informat. Process. Manage.
42, 248–263.
Kay, J., 2001. Learner Control. User Model. User-Adapt. Interact. 11, 111–127.
Kuflik, T., Stock, O., Zancanaro M., Gorfinkel, A., Jbera, S., Katz S., Sheidin, J., Kashtan,
N., 2011. A visitor’s guide in an active museum: Presentations, communications,
and reflection. JOCCH 3, 11.
Landauer, T., 1997. Behavioral research methods in human–computer interaction.
In: M.G. Helander, T.K. Landauer, P.V. Prabhu (Eds.), Handbook of Human–
Computer Interaction, second ed. Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam, pp. 203–
227 (Chapter 9).
Nielsen, J., 1993. Noncommand user interfaces. Commun. ACM 36, 83–99.
Norman, D.A., 1999. The Invisible Computer. MIT press, Cambridge, MA, London.
Norman, D.A., 2007. Simplicity is highly overrated. Interactions 14, 40–41.
Novak, T.P., Hoffman, D.L., Duhachek, A., 2003. The influence of goal-directed
and experiential activities on online flow experiences. J. Consumer Psychol.,
3–16.
Oppermann, R., Specht, M., 2000. A context-sensitive nomadic exhibition guide.
Handheld Ubiquitous Comput., 31–54.
Petrelli, D., Not, E., 2005. User-centred design of flexible hypermedia for a mobile
guide: reflections on the hyperaudio experience. User Model. User-Adapt.
Interact. 15, 303–338.
Petrelli, D., Not, E., Zancanaro, M., et al., 2001. Modelling and adapting to context.
Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 5, 20–24.
Pianesi, F., Graziola, I., Zancanaro, M., et al., 2009. The motivational and control
structure underlying the acceptance of adaptive museum guides – an empirical
study. Interact. Comput. 21, 186–200.
Schilit, B., Adams, N., Want, R., 1994. Context-aware computing applications. In:
First Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications. WMCSA 1994,
pp. 85–90.
Serrell, B., 1997. Paying attention: the duration and allocation of visitors’ time in
museum exhibitions. Curator Museum J. 40, 108–113.

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

12

J. Lanir et al. / Interacting with Computers xxx (2011) xxx–xxx

Shneiderman, B., Plaisant, C., 2009. Designing the user interface. Addison-Wesley
Reading, MA.
Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., 2007. PEACH: Intelligent Interfaces for Museum Visits.
Springer-Verlag, New York Inc.
Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., Busetta, P., et al., 2007. Adaptive, intelligent presentation of
information for the museum visitor in PEACH. User Model. User-Adapt. Interact.
17, 257–304.
Tennenhouse, D., 2000. Proactive computing. Commun. ACM 43, 43–50.

Wakkary, R., Hatala, M., 2006. ec(h)o: Situated play in a tangible and audio museum
guide. In: Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Designing Interactive systems,
pp. 281–290.
Want, R., Pering, T., Tennenhouse, D., 2003. Comparing autonomic and proactive
computing. IBM Syst. J. 42, 129–135.
Zimmermann, A., Lorenz, A., 2008. LISTEN: a user-adaptive audio-augmented
museum guide. User Model User-Adapt. Interact. 18, 389–416.

Please cite this article in press as: Lanir, J., et al. Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile museum guide. Interact. Comput. (2011),
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.05.007

