Guides, locals, chaperones, buddies and captains:
managing trust through interaction paradigms
Connor Graham

Keith Cheverst

Department of Information Systems
The University of Melbourne
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
+61 3 83441516

Department of Computing
Lancaster University
Lancaster LA1 4YR, United Kingdom
+ 44 1524 594539

cgraham@unimelb.edu.au

kc@comp.lancs.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
A key problem in context-aware mobile computing is one of
reconciling or mapping the physical and the virtual planes during
interaction. This paper describes six possible characteristics of
this ‘mapping problem’ to understand and describe possible
interaction paradigms for use when designing context-aware
mobile guides. We draw from two evaluations of two mobile
guides: the GUIDE project from the University of Lancaster,
England and the Trammate project from the University of
Melbourne, Australia. The six characteristics of mapping
problems described here are determinism, transparency,
accuracy, indexicality, predictability of content and predictability
of behaviour. Through these two cases we continue to discuss the
consequences of failure to design for effective mappings: namely
a failure to match users’ expectations and a consequential loss of
trust. We then describe five possible interaction paradigms for
context-aware mobile guides (guide, local, chaperone, buddy,
captain), based on the six characteristics posited in the paper. We
suggest that these paradigms can be used to provide assistance to
designers building context-aware mobile guides for trust.

Keywords
Mobile guides, context-aware mobile
interaction paradigms, trust, design support

systems,

mapping,

1. INTRODUCTION
Characterising possible interaction paradigms has been important
in the history of interaction design. Describing systems as having
a command line or GUI interface, for example, has enabled
interaction designers to understand user expectations better. These
paradigms also assist users in knowing what to expect when
interacting with such computing systems. Generic categories have
also been utilized in fields such as Information Systems, to help
make sense of types of systems for example, facilitating the
discussion of possible solutions to problems across different
contexts. Such terms can also be regarded as part of a toolbox that
assists with the design of systems.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
3rd Workshop ‘HCI on Mobile Guides’ at the Sixth International
Symposium on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services, September 13, 2004, Glasgow, Scotland UK.

Mobile guides are defined as “systems that guide mobile users by
providing local and location-based services, such as navigation
support and tourism information” [22:1]. Kray and Baus [16],
review and compare nine different mobile guides from 1996 to
2003. They extract five dimensions characterising guides: basic
features, such as the positioning technology deployed within the
system; situational factors, including the user’s ability to select
content; adaptation capabilities, such as the system’s adaptability
to user position; interface and user interaction, the system’s
support for multiple modalities and natural language, for example;
and architecture or the network and system technology used to
develop the guide. Here, we focus on situational factors,
adaptation capabilities and interface and user interaction issues,
with a view to providing support for design teams developing
‘intelligent’ context-aware mobile guides. We aim to enrich the
understanding of interaction paradigms for these guides.
Our suggestion is that digital guides often borrow design features
from existing sources of information in use but rarely consider the
impact on the user’s trust of the system. Three such sources are
guidebooks, tour guides and tourist information centres. A
guidebook is “a book of interest about a place, designed for the
use of visitors or tourists” [17]. A tourist guide is “a person who
guides visitors in the language of their choice and interprets the
cultural and national heritage of an area, which person normally
possesses an area-specific qualification” [5]. A tourist information
centre is “…an office, usually run by a tourist board or local
authority, providing information about the locality to visitors” [5].
Of these three, clearly the guidebook is the least ‘intelligent’ with
both the tourist guide and the tourist information centre having
some ‘intelligence’, to support a dialog with the visitor in order to
react to queries made by the visitor based on an human
understanding of their abilities, for example.
Digital guidebooks (e.g. CyberGuide, [1]), perhaps inspired by
the design of tourist guidebooks, operate much like information
repositories with limited ‘intelligence’, indexing and limited
opportunities to construct complex queries. Thus the search space
can be large and require some level of user skill to navigate. This
type of mobile guide focuses on providing basic features to the
user, has limited accommodation for situational factors (e.g.
context), has limited adaptation capabilities and tends to devolve
control to the user.
Digital tourist guides organise information and interaction
according to specific rules and constraints with some flexibility in
navigation. For example, the Peach system [30] organises
information (i.e. cinematic narrations and animations describing
frescoes in a museum in Trento) in a way that is highly linear but

extremely expressive with regard to the subject matter. However,
it is important to note that digital tourist guides may also be
designed to appear ‘intelligent’ and take control away from the
user (as with a traditional tourist guide) as illustrated by the ‘ontour’ mode supported by the GUIDE system [8].
Digital tourist information systems (e.g. DeepMap, [15]),
reflecting physical tourist information centres, operate like
decision-support systems, providing information to assist with
problem-solving and providing indexed responses to complex
querying. Digital tourist information systems tend to be
democratic with control and again can exhibit some level of
intelligence, e.g. by the utilization of user modeling techniques.
Characterization of interaction paradigms has been useful when
addressing particular design problems for particular users
completing particular work in particular contexts. Form-based
interaction on a Web page, for example, is understood to be
effective for certain work, in certain circumstances for a particular
population. One such design problem is the mapping problem.
Preece et al [20:23] characterise mapping as a relationship
between a ‘control’, or component of an artifact, and its effect ‘in
the world’. Preece et al [19:716] characterise mappings as “how a
description at one level of abstraction is translated into a
description at another level.” Green [13], when describing visual
programming environments, has characterized mapping as the
relationship between the world of the computer program (e.g.
syntax, widgets etc.) and the problem world (e.g. having to write a
sorting algorithm). Each of these characterisations of mapping
have two things in common. Firstly they describe a relationship or
coupling between two entities. Secondly they posit two planes or
abstractions, which can be understood to be a physical or ‘real’
plane and a computer-mediated ‘virtual’ plane. Thus, the mapping
problem is related to the boundary problem in mixed reality. A
boundary marks the “joining together of whole environments” [4],
where environments can be physical or virtual. A boundary can
also apply to the division between the virtual plane embodied in a
mobile guide and the real plane of the physical world. Benford et
al. [4:207] raise a pertinent question with regard to mixed reality
boundaries: “Will the boundary be completely transparent (i.e.,
freely allow information to pass across it), or will it alter
awareness in some way, perhaps being more opaque?” With
mobile guides, the boundary between what is in the system and
what is in the world is at times blurred and permeable as the
system augments the real world and vice versa. For example, an
icon representing the user’s current position, forces the user to
map or augment where she thinks she is through being in a place
through what the guide tells her with regard to her current
position.
Here we explore the mapping problem with relation to contextaware mobile guides in use. We use two cases firstly to illustrate
that mapping is a serious problem for mobile guide users and
secondly to explore possible characteristics of this problem from
the system perspective. Both cases involved evaluation of mobile
guides in a real context through field studies. Through these two
cases we discuss the consequences of failure to design for
effective mappings: namely a failure to match users’ expectations
and a consequential loss of trust. We then propose possible
interaction paradigms for mobile guides and a response to the
mapping problem in the form of a matrix relating characteristics
of mapping problems to interaction paradigms. Finally we utilize

this matrix to reanalyze one example of a mapping problem and
propose a new design based on this analysis.

2. CASE DESCRIPTIONS
This paper draws on two cases: the GUIDE project at the
University of Lancaster, England and the Trammate Project at the
University of Melbourne, Australia. The evaluations of the
systems emerging from both projects will be focused on here.

2.1 GUIDE
The GUIDE project resulted in a tour guide application developed
for the City of Lancaster. It was developed through the
Department of Computing at the University of Lancaster. The
GUIDE system integrated the use of personal computing
technologies, wireless communications, context-awareness and
adaptive hypermedia in order to support the information and
navigation needs of visitors to the city of Lancaster. The GUIDE
unit consisted of a customized Web browser. The system is
described in more detail in [8]. The evaluation of the system
utilized expert review and three field trials. These trials involved
direct observation with users encouraged to think-aloud and
subsequent semi-structured interviews. Sixty participants,
between the ages of 10 and 70, used the system in these trials. No
set tasks were given to the participants and they were invited to
use the system only for as long as they wanted to. The trials took
place around Lancaster castle in Lancaster.

2.2 Trammate
The Trammate project evaluated a functional prototype that
integrated wireless communications, simulated locationawareness, a geospatial data service and a database of tram route
information. The system supported journey planning for and
travelling on the tram network in Melbourne, Australia. The
system was developed by Jessica Smith from the Department of
Geomatics at the University of Melbourne and designed to run
within a PocketPC Web browser. Thus the system represented an
integration of many services [26], but had limited locationawareness. The system is described in more detail in [26]. The
evaluation of the system involved a field evaluation, laboratory
evaluation [18] and heuristic evaluation [29]. The issues described
here emerged from a grounded analysis [27] of the field
evaluation data. The field evaluation involved five participants
aged between 21 and 42. Three were female and two were male.
These participants were asked to complete route planning tasks
involving tram travel in the Melbourne CBD. All the users were
frequent computer users, had some experience with using mobile
devices and were familiar with the Melbourne CBD.

3. MAPPING ISSUES
In each of the two cases described above, issues with mapping
emerged i.e. issues concerning some element of coupling or
dependency between the mobile guide and the physical world. For
example, in many instances the mapping between the user’s
location in the world (real) and the user’s location as represented
in the system (virtual) caused problems – this is similar to the
problem instantiated by maps in shopping centres that indicate
current position (‘You are here’) without describing relationships
between current position and other things, such as landmarks.
The remainder of this section describes six characteristics of these
mapping problems, emerging from the analysis of the two cases.

The analysis of issues with GUIDE is presented using miniature
scenarios grounded in the field evaluations. The analysis of issues
with Trammate is presented using extracts from the transcript of
the field evaluation with appropriate background information.
These extracts are presented as dialogues between the user and
the evaluator.

3.1 Determination and indexicality
Determination and indexicality both refer to the ‘just-enoughness’
of the mapping between the system and the situation.
Determination describes the intelligence of information provision
and the constraints imposed on interaction with the system [29].
This will often translate into a context-aware system determining
the information the user needs and how s/he should get it.
Determination is similar to the notion of control in automation
studies [23] and initiative in dialogue design.
Indexicality describes the broad contextuality of information: if
information is provided in a context where it makes sense and in
an appropriate manner given that context. Indexicality has been
defined previously as “a property of an interface representation
that is defined as having a context-specific meaning” [12].
Both determination and indexicality are “two-tailed”. Information
and dialogue can be over-determined and under-determined: the
issue here is a fundamental design tradeoff between prescription
and freedom/flexibility. Information and dialogue can also be
over-indexed and under-indexed (these terms are illustrated with
examples in the following sub-sections). Inappropriately indexed
information can be very damaging for the user’s understanding of
the mappings within the system and can severely impede task
completion.

3.1.1 Example 1: GUIDE
Mary is standing in the town square area (containing the
Castle, Museum etc) but in the distance on the top of a hill she
sees an interesting looking dome topped building that takes
her interest. She presses the ‘info’ button but the system only
gives links to the objects that are of close proximity.
In this example what is presented to the user is over-determined,
in this case as a result of inappropriate indexicality. Specifically,
proximity is used as the key determining factor for the list of
attractions presented to Mary when a more appropriate factor
might have been the attractions that were visible or more
specifically salient to Mary when she pressed the ‘info’ button.

3.1.2 Example 2: Tram-mate
Sarah wants to catch a tram. She is standing on a street along
which a lot of trams run. She queries the system in order to
find out which tram to catch.
Evaluator: Did the system help you?
Sarah: No it didn’t. Oh it is too. Thank you. Let’s see what
happens here. Okay. Enter departure time.
Evaluator: Yeah.
Sarah: Now. And waiting so it’s…I want to leave now. By the
time it updates it won’t be now anymore.
In this example, what is provided to the user is under-determined.
Sarah simply needs a tram number. The system has not
determined the information to present to Sarah based on her
location and the current time. Thus she expresses concern
regarding the system’s ability to provide the information she

needs in time (underlined). The content of mobile guides can also
be over-determined: pushing information to the user when s/he is
still embedded in past interactions. Notably, in this example the
information is under-indexed because the system does not deliver
tram information based on the time and Sarah’s location – it
would have been more useful had it, for example, informed Sarah
of all the trams leaving from the nearest tram stop in the next two
minutes.

3.1.3 Example 3: Tram-mate
Kieran is trying to find out information from the system to
help him to decide which stop to disembark from the tram he
is currently on. Kieran chooses to view a map in the system to
help him with this decision. The map is not detailed enough to
assist him: it is a high level map with no low level detail.
Kieran: Oh, look at that map. What is the good is that map?
Evaluator: Does that help you?
Kieran: What the hell is that?
Evaluator: Does that help you?
Kieran: Nothin…What is it? I don’t even know where it is.
Evaluator: Do you have any…?
Kieran: I’m trying to get this fine detail between stop 5 and stop 8
or stop 6 and stop 8 and and it gives me this. That’s great.
In this example the indexicality of the information presented by
the mobile guide is not appropriate. What is provided to the user
is not indexed enough. Specifically, the information is not
indexed to the user’s current area of interest or region effectively.
Thus the mapping between the guide and the real world is too
abstract. Specifically, the user is unable to get detailed enough
information to make effective decisions (underlined).

3.2 Accuracy & transparency
Accuracy and transparency both refer to the ‘integrity’ of the
mapping between the system and the situation. Accuracy
describes the correctness of information: if the information
provided actually maps onto the physical world given the user’s
situation. The issue of accuracy is related to uncertainty [9], or the
system’s inability to understand a user’s situation exactly.
Transparency in groupware systems has been described as the
degree to which “the system does not [or does] bring obstacles in
the way of the task he or she is carrying out” [3:177]. This notion
of transparency has also been applied to mixed reality
environments to mean how easily information and users can cross
boundaries between environments and the extent to which the
system controls awareness and privacy. These definitions describe
what we refer to here as the how of transparency. We define the
what of transparency in terms of obviousness of the mappings
between the system and the real world, or lack of these mappings.
This includes the level of “honesty” that the system expresses and
the visibility of its relationship with the physical world. Thus, in
GUIDE, the information in the system was made more transparent
by asking the visitor a question about her location when the
system was uncertain about her location. Information can be
over-accurate and under-accurate and over-transparent and undertransparent enough. A consequence of inappropriate accuracy is
that subsequent system adaptation will be inappropriate [7:10]. A
consequence of the system being under-transparent is that the user
may ‘lose’ the mapping between the system and the real world,

for example how her location ‘in-the-system’ relates to her
location ‘in-the-world’ [9:4].

3.2.1 Example 4: GUIDE
John walks from the Tourist Information Center towards
Lancaster Castle but the display of his PDA still reads
‘Tourist Information Center’ and when John presses the
‘info’ button information about the TIC building rather than
Lancaster Castle is given – John comments that his trust for
the system has been damaged.
In this example the mobile guide does not have all the information
John needs to make sense of his situation. Specifically, John
entered an area where no location beacons where received by his
GUIDE unit when he approached the Lancaster Castle from the
Tourist Information Center. This is a problem of accuracy, as
what is presented to John is not correct, but there is also a lack of
transparency - what was presented to John did not reflect that the
system could not accurately determine his location.

3.2.2 Example 5: Trammate
Kieran is trying to catch a tram from outside a shopping mall.
He uses the system to find out the tram he should catch. The
system automatically detects his location, and asks him to
verify his location.
Evaluator: Where does it tell you, you are?
Kieran: It tells me I’m on Bourke Street and Elizabeth Street.
Evaluator: Is that right?

3.2.3 Example 6: Trammate
Sarah is using a mobile guide to catch a tram from a
particular stop. She catches the tram from the appropriate
stop being driven by the system. Sarah is on the tram. She
then consults the system again, looking for the tram she is
currently on.
Evaluator: Is that [unclear]?
Sarah: No, no we have to get off at stop 10. Hold on, this has
changed.
Evaluator: It’s changed?
Sarah: Yeah, we got on s… it’s updated itself.
Evaluator: Is it?
Sarah: Yeah.
Evaluator: What has it updated?
Sarah: It says we should be on tram 6 which is the one behind us.
Except that originally we were on tram 5…it said to get on tram 5
but we’re on [a] tram at the time that it said….
In this example, the what information given to the user lacks
transparency and thus the mapping between the information in the
guide and the real world is confusing for the user. Specifically the
guide refreshes the tram route query without informing the user
about the change, resulting in different information being
presented to the user. This information is based on the stop the
user caught the tram from, not on the tram Sarah is currently on.

Kieran: Ohhh, it’s true enough. It’s close enough.

3.3 Predictability: content and behaviour

Evaluator: Yeah?

Predictability is a useful but very broad term. It is therefore
important, in the context of this paper, to distinguish between
predictability of content (e.g. what a mobile guide may ‘choose’
to present to a user given the current situation) and predictability
of behaviour (e.g. how a mobile guide may ‘choose’ to present a
given piece of information to user given the current situation).
Predictability of content can be regarded as relying upon the
system providing compatibility at some level between the
expectations of the user (gained through previous interactions and
experiences with the system) situated in the real world and the
information presented by the system. Predictability of behaviour
can be understood as relying on the system providing
compatibility between the expectations of the user engaged in a
situation and how the information is presented, for example
through choice of modality.

Kieran: Yeah. I’d call that Elizabeth Street.
…
Evaluator: So what happened there?
Kieran: Well I don’t see why it’s interchanging. Ahhh, it thinks
I’m so far down I should[‘nt] bother getting on a tram.
Evaluator: So what does the system tell you to do?
Kieran: It’s wrong. It’s telling me to get on that stop there and go
up to that stop there and that’s silly.
Evaluator: Why?
Kieran: Because it would be quicker for me to just go there.
In this example the mobile guide describes where Kieran should
go, without acknowledging where he is. What is provided to the
user is simply not accurate: the mapping between what is
presented in the guide and the user’s situation is not correct. The
system describes how Kieran is at the intersection of the shopping
mall and Elizabeth Street, when he is at the intersection of the
shopping centre and Swanston Street, a block away from his
location ‘in-the-system’. Kieran doesn’t think it’s important at the
time, but later the system returns a route that requires him to take
two trams (“interchanging” in the dialogue), a tram to a place
close to his current location and a tram to his final destination,
when he knows he can walk to the tram stop to catch the second
tram. This results in Kieran losing trust in the system
(underlined).

Cheverst et al. [6] describe how “When considering adaptation to
context, designers should be careful to bear in mind the principle
of least astonishment and the need for predictability.”
Predictability of content and predictability of behaviour are “twotailed”: a system can be both over-predictable and underpredictable with regard to content and behaviour. For example,
under-predictable behaviour, in the form of unexpected dialogue
or representations, may enable highlighting or emphasizing
salient information by upsetting expectations or breaking the
norms established through previous interactions with the user. A
lack of predictability of content within a system may also break
monotony and even increase learning through ambiguity [11]: a
learner may be forced to discover information herself because of
ambiguous content presented by a mobile guide.

3.3.1 Example 7: Guide
John returns to Lancaster castle for a second visit. The
information presented is different to that presented on John’s
first visit some 15 minutes previously. On his first visit John
was presented with a detailed description of the appearance of
the castle via audio, text and images. This time John is
presented with audio, text and images describing the history
of the castle. John is not entirely surprised because he is
aware that the system is recording the attractions that he has
visited and adapting its behaviour appropriately (as would a
human tour guide). John returns again 20 minutes later. This
time John is a little surprised as he is only presented with an
audio description of the day’s events at the castle.
In this example, on the third visit the system decided not to repeat
the detailed information about the Castle’s appearance and history
to John because in John’s user model the system had recorded that
this information had already been presented to John.
Consequently, the ‘intelligent’ behaviour exhibited by the system
involved only presenting John an audio description of the day’s
events at the Castle. Here the predictability of what is presented is
medium: at some level John was expecting the information to be
different on his third visit, but he may not have been expecting
information on the day’s events at the Castle. The predictability
of how the information is presented is low, however: John had
developed a model that information would be presented to him via
audio, text and images. Thus, when he received a description via
audio alone he was surprised.

3.3.2 Example 8: GUIDE
When trialing a push based version of the guide system, Jane
was surprised by the following events. On approaching the
Castle Jane was pushed an audio description about the Castle
and again when approaching the town hall the system pushed
another appropriate audio description. However, when
approaching a famous antique plaque no audio description
was given, but a textual description was given instead.
The obvious problem here is that from her actions Jane was
building a model of the system’s behaviour which was damaged
when she approached the antique plaque expecting the system to
push an audio description of the plaque. This was due to the fact
that how the information was presented was not predictable: the
information channeled to Jane was presented as text instead of
audio.

3.3.3 Example 9: Trammate
Liz is standing at a street intersection trying to decide which
way to go to reach her destination. She refers to a map to try
to help her with making this decision.
Evaluator: Okay, how do you know what direction to go?
Liz: Umm, not, not because of the system, well because I’ve done,
I’ve sort of caught the tram before ummm…I know that…let’s
have a look. You see the last time we looked at the map we had
destination on, but the destination’s gone.
In this example, the mobile guide has not been predictable
concerning what it represented to the user of the real world: what
is presented to Liz does not help her achieve her goals or relate to
what she wants to do. We can also argue that how the information
is presented is not predictable as the syntax of the map did not
match Liz’s expectations (underlined).

3.4 Comments on examples
Three additional issues emerge from the analysis above. Firstly, it
is difficult to apply the characteristics of the mapping problem
discretely: more than one characteristic can be used to understand
the problem embodied in the examples. For example, in Example
8 the system is under-transparent in that the set of objects in the
real world with a representation in the GUIDE object model is
hidden: it is not transparent to the user. In this example, there is
also a problem with accuracy: the system does not accurately
model the physical world.
We do not consider a one-to-one coupling between problem and
characteristic to be possible or even desirable. The goal of
describing these characteristics is to understand key issues with
developing context-aware devices better with a view to proposing
solutions. There may be conflicts and tradeoffs when these
characteristics are deployed, which is a reality of the design
process [e.g. 14].
Secondly, the examples above have considered characteristics of
mappings between the system and real world when place (e.g.
landmarks) and events (e.g. time of departure) are involved in the
mappings. In most of the examples the mapping issues are more
complex, involving many more aspects of the situations
described, such as user orientation, environmental conditions and
personal variables. For instance, regarding orientation, in
Example 3, involving the GUIDE system, the success of the
mappings depends on exactly where Mary is standing and facing:
she may not be able to see a key landmark, for example due to her
orientation. The issue of orientation also emerged in the
Trammate study, particularly when users were given walking
directions to be followed after disembarking a tram. This caused
one user to complain about the directions given by the system:
“But it’s told me the wrong thing. I don’t want to go left. I have to
go right.” The effectiveness of mappings also depends on
environmental issues such as if it is night and if the sun is shining.
For instance, in Example 1 some attractions may not be as salient
at night as during the day, making it difficult to utilize the GUIDE
system effectively. The issue of environment also emerged in the
Trammate study, causing one user to comment when looking at
the PDA’s display: “It’s very difficult to see with the light.”
Personal variables can affect the success of mappings too: in
Example 1, if Mary is short-sighted she may not be able to see
certain attractions clearly. This issue also emerged in the
Trammate study, causing one user to comment when using the
PDA on a tram: “The other thing is, if I wear glasses I try to
remember the street names and I don’t really want to be worried
about looking back and forth because I get confused if I look
down at a small screen.”
Finally, most of the analysis in the examples has focused on the
what of the mappings in context-aware devices, or on the content
of the mappings. However, for predictability, and to some extent
transparency, how the mapping occurs seems equally important
in the analysis. In Example 6, how the dialogue handles the
transparency of the mapping is important when understanding the
problem in the dialogue.
Acknowledging these limitations, we will now use the above
characteristics to describe interaction paradigms for mobile
guides.

4. Trust in mobile guides

4.2 Trust and mapping characteristics

Trust has emerged as an important issue in the design of ecommerce Websites [21, 10], online health sites [25], mobile
commerce systems [24] and mobile guides [22]. Trust is defined
as involving “two parties: the trustor and the trustee, reliant on
each other for mutual benefit”, “uncertainty and risk” and the
trustor’s “faith in the trustee’s honesty and benevolence” [24:92].
A more technology-specific definition describes trust as “a
multilateral relation, involving the technology…social partners in
a direct interaction…a social context…experts, who have
designed and developed a system,…who control a system, or who
help the public to become aware of risks and trustworthiness”
[22:3]. Riegelsberger et al. [21:122] critique current
understandings of trust as focusing on cognitive aspects of trust
and suggest that trust encompasses both cognitive and affective
dimensions.

Regarding determination, one participant in the study
commented: “Na, I don’t believe it…Umm, why? Cos I know, I
kinda of, I wanna go to my stop anyway, I think my stop’s better.
No matter what stop it’s told me…” Thus the over-determination
in the system regarding which stop the participant should catch a
tram from caused the participant to question the system.

Given this short review, trust in a mobile guide arena seems to
involve more than one party, with particular cognitive and
affective peculiarities, involved in interaction, a technology and a
social context. Trust also evolves and has discrete stages of
development [24, 25]. Factors that influence trust in Internet and
mobile commerce include familiarity, information quality [24],
branding, usability, competence, security [10], personalization
capabilities, user interface design, site architecture, user control
[2]. There is disagreement regarding the relative importance of
such factors [25] across domains, but some agreement that there is
a need to explore these factors through appropriate methods and
involving representative users [22].
We acknowledge that there are many factors influencing trust
beyond interaction design. Our conjecture is that appropriate
mapping is an important factor in initial trust formation in mobile
guides. We also conjecture based on our studies that trust in the
context of mobile guides is volatile: users’ trust can be gained and
lost and regained over a short period of time. To illustrate this, we
again draw on data from the two cases described in section 2,
above.

4.1 Trust and mapping
In the evaluation of GUIDE, Cheverst et al. [9] describe how
particular ambiguous wording, such as “You are in the castle
area” was used in dialogue with users in order to manage their
expectations. This dialogue design emerged from experiences
with wording that was non-ambiguous and under-accurate. [9]
note such dialogue (e.g. “You are at the castle”) had “lowered the
trust of users” because the system had given an impression of
accuracy that was not the case.
In Trammate, lack of trust emerged as an issue among users when
the information provided by the system was inappropriate with
regard to all six of the mapping characteristics described above
and usually resulted in breakdowns in trust. This was despite the
computer-savvy users generally approaching the system with an
attitude of trust. As the evaluation involved about 90 minutes in
the field using the guide it was not possible to evaluate long term
trust development. However, some insights into initial trust
formation and trust development were gained. Examples of trust
breakdown, drawn from the data, are presented below, with a
view to better understanding the connection between mapping
characteristics and trust formation.

With regard to indexicality one participant questioned the
trustworthiness of the maps in the system due to under-indexing:
“It’s just that I didn’t trust the map telling me where I was at the
moment.” If information had been indexed to the participant’s
current location, this lack of trust may have been adjusted.
Under-accuracy also caused problems with one participant
commenting: “Yeah, I don’t think that’s right because Exhibition
Street’s only two stops…So I can’t really rely on that.”
Regarding transparency, one user commented: “…but I wonder
how accurate it’s likely to be because we’re going such a short
distance.” Another user commented “No the metres is, uhh, only
if you think in metres but 7 metres is really hilarious. That means
like just get up and go there. Get off and where you are, think if
you got off at the back of the tram or the front of the tram that
could be a whole lot of metres already used up. And maybe you
wouldn’t know whether you were allowed to walk past the front
of the tram or not.” In this example, the over-precise wording and
measurement in the system contributed to under-transparency
concerning the accuracy of the mapping.
One participant questioned the trustworthiness of the system due
to under-predictable content: “It’s just that I didn’t trust the map
telling me where I was at the moment. If it had told me the street
names, I would have been able to figure out which way to go.”
This participant had been presented with information using street
names up to this point. Thus the omission of street names caused
her to lose trust in the system. With regard to predictability of
behaviour, one user, surprised at the system’s updating of route
information provided, stated: “Yeah, but why did it change the
route? That’s stupid.” The consequence of this was that this user
continued to question the trustworthiness of the system for the
remainder of the evaluation.

5. Proposed interaction paradigms
We have shown that trust relates to mapping issues. We now
present five interaction paradigms that can be used to help design
context-aware mobile guides. Possible generic paradigms have
already been described above (e.g. guidebook). The aim of the
paradigms below is to act like tools, affording the discussion of
mapping issues when designing guides.
The five interaction paradigms presented below emerged from the
analysis of the examples above. They are guide, local, chaperone,
buddy and captain. These paradigms can be thought of as
descriptive of possible mobile guides and useful abstractions for
use in the design of future paradigms for mobile guides to
ensuring that trust is at least considered during the design process.

5.1 Guide
The Oxford English Dictionary describes a guide as “a person
who advises or shows the way to others” [17]. The Guide
paradigm acts like a decision support system and can be
compared to a guide on a hiking tour. A Guide exhibits
“intelligence” through proactively making recommendations, and

providing assistive information for example. The Guide paradigm
also passes some initiative to the user during dialogues and filters
information presented to the user. The second design of the
GUIDE system exhibited Guide-like characteristics: it pushed the
user information on opening times of attractions, for example.

5.2 Local
The Oxford English Dictionary describes a local as “an inhabitant
of a particular area or neighbourhood” [17]. The Local paradigm
acts like an information repository and can be compared to a local
expert on a particular geographical area. The Local tends to be
more passive than a guide: local experts often have to be sought
out. Locals respond when queried, passing all initiative to the user
during dialogues. Limited ‘intelligent’ filtering of information is
used when responding to queries. The Trammate system exhibited
characteristics of a Local paradigm: it accessed extensive tram
timetable information and CBD geospatial data.

5.3 Chaperone
The Chaperone paradigm acts like an expert system and can be
compared to a guardian [9]. When adopting the role of a guardian
a system may only interact with the user if they are doing
something wrong. Chaperone, like locals tend to be passive,
although the chaperone may take initiative away from the user
under certain circumstances. Thus, a high level of ‘intelligence’ is
required to present information to the user. The chaperone is not
really designed to be queried. The GUIDE system, for example,
could have interacted with the user through using a chaperone
paradigm by stating: “You are taking the wrong turning, you
ought to go left, not right here.”

5.4 Buddy
The Oxford English Dictionary describes a buddy as “a working
companion with whom close cooperation is required”. The idea of
cooperation and shared responsibility for completing the user’s
work is important. A Buddy has elements of the expert system,
decision support system and information repository. The Buddy
utilizes mixed initiative dialogues, sharing control of the
interaction with users. A Buddy exhibits a high level of
‘intelligence’ concerning its interaction with the user. A later
version of the GUIDE system acted like a Buddy through asking
questions such as “Can you see the castle?” Thus it adopted a
cooperative stance when interacting with the user and utilized
ambiguity in its dialogue.

5.5 Captain
The Oxford English Dictionary describes a Captain as “a person
in charge of a team” [17]. The Captain acts like an expert system
and uses an interaction paradigm similar to an on board
navigation system in a car. Turn left Exhibition for 124 metres.
Thus, the Captain takes initiative during dialogues and utilizes
“intelligence” to filter information presented to the user heavily.
Trammate exhibited the Captain interaction paradigm at times: it
presented the user with directions which were termed in an
imperative fashion e.g. “Go along Bourke Street for 7 metres.”

6. Interaction Paradigms and Mapping Issues
Each of the interaction paradigms described above can be
understood in terms of the characteristics of mapping problems.
The table below maps the six mapping characteristics onto each
of the paradigms, with a view to gaining a better understanding to

leverage design for context-aware mobile guides. We
corroborated this characterization of each paradigm through
discussion. Some characteristics fit certain paradigms better than
others: predictability of behaviour, for example, seems less
applicable to the Local paradigm than the Captain paradigm.
Table 1. Interaction Paradigms With Respect To Mapping
Characteristics
Guide

Local

Chaperone

Buddy

Captain

Det

Medium

Low

Low

Medium

High

Ind

High

Low

High

High

High

Acc

High

High

High

Medium

High

Tra

Low

Low

Low

High

Low

Pre1

Medium

Medium

Low

Low

Medium

Pre2

Medium

High

High

High

High

Legend
Det

Determination

Ind

Tra

Transparency Pre1

Indexicality

Acc

Predictability
Pre2
(content)

Accuracy
Predictability
(behaviour)

The table above describes how the Guide interaction paradigm is
highly indexical and accurate, not very transparent, and exhibits
quite high determination, predictability of content and behaviour.
The Guide paradigm could probably maintain trust in stable
situations where the domain is quite well-modeled. The Local
interaction paradigm has low determination, indexicality and
transparency and exhibits quite high predictability of content and
high accuracy and predictability of behaviour. It is likely the
Local paradigm would be effective at maintaining trust in stable
situations where the domain is well-modeled. The Chaperone
interaction paradigm has low determination, transparency and
predictability of content and high indexicality, accuracy and
predictability of behaviour. The Chaperone paradigm would
probably be effective at maintaining trust in unstable situations
where the domain is well-modeled. The Buddy paradigm has
medium determination and accuracy, high indexicality,
transparency and predictability of behaviour and low
predictability of content. The Buddy paradigm is likely to be
effective where domain is not well-modeled and the situation is
unstable. The characteristics for the Captain paradigm are all
high, bar transparency, which is low, and predictability of
content, which is quite high. The Captain paradigm could be
effective at maintaining trust in stable situations where the
domain is well-modeled but the user is not.

7. Implications for design teams
Designing context-aware mobile guides for trust is difficult. Trust
issues emerged even though the users in both the cases presented
here generally approached the system with an attitude of trust. As
described in [6] regarding GUIDE “The vast majority of visitors
said they were prepared to trust the information presented by the
system, including navigation instructions.” However, these two
cases have illustrated that trust often breaks down during
interaction with context-aware mobile guides. The GUIDE project

also showed that trust was volatile: “A number of visitors
suggested that their level of trust was not constant but varied with
the apparent accuracy of the information presented.” In the
Trammate evaluation, many users vacillated between trust and
lack of trust when interacting with the system.
It remains to be investigated what the exact nature of the
relationship between trust and mapping characteristics is.
However, effective mapping shows correspondence between the
system and the real world, i.e. information quality [24], and
therefore the possibility of the user maintaining faith with the
system. We argue mapping should be acknowledged within the
design process by firstly acknowledging that there will be
mapping problems and articulating these problems using the
characteristics described here. We also believe designers should
regard the artifact being designed as engendering trust and that
the design will be fallible. Thus, when we create scenarios and
artifacts for use within the design process, we should develop
ones that test and explore characteristics of mapping problems.
We acknowledge that the speculations regarding the
appropriateness of the paradigms for particular domains of use,
situation and user model require more exploration. For example, a
Captain paradigm may be appropriate for factory engineers
checking equipment, but not for a traveling salesperson moving
between locations, where a Local paradigm may be more
appropriate.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was part funded by a Melbourne Abroad Traveling
Scholarship from the University of Melbourne. Thanks to the
Trammate project team: Steve Howard, Jennie Carroll, Daniel
Tobin and Frank Vetere (Department of Information Systems,
University of Melbourne) and John Murphy (Novell, Australia).
Special thanks are reserved for Jesper Kjeldskov (Aalborg
University), the Trammate Project Manager, and Jessica Davies
(nee Smith) from the Department of Geomatics at the University
of Melbourne who designed and built the Trammate system.
Thanks to Christian Kray for his valuable input into the paper.

9. REFERENCES
[1] Abowd, D. A., Atkeson, C. G., Hong, J., Long, S. Kooper,
R., and Pinkerton M. Cyperguide: A Mobile Context-Aware
Tour Guide. Wireless Networks, 3, 5 (1996), 421–433.
[2] Araujo, I., and Arauja, I. Developing trust in internet
commerce. In Proceedings of the 2003 Conference of the
Centre for Advanced Studies Conference on Collaborative
Research. (Toronto, Canada, October 6-9, 2003). IBM Press,
2003, 1-15.
[3] Beaudouin-Lafon, M., and Karsenty, A. Transparency and
Awareness in a Real-time Groupware System. In
Proceedings of the 5th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology (Monteray, United
States, November 15-18, 1992). ACM Press, New York,
USA, 2000, 171-180.
[4] Benford, S., Greenhalgh, C., and Reynard, G., Brown, C.,
and Koleva, B. Understanding and constructing shared
spaces with mixed-reality boundaries. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), 5, 3 (September
1998), 185-223.

[5] Breaver, A. A Dictionary of Travel and Tourism
Terminology. CABI Publishing, Oxon, UK, 2001.
[6] Cheverst, K., Davies N., and Mitchell K., and Efstratiou, C.
Developing a Context-aware Electronic Tourist Guide: Some
Issues and Experiences. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
’00) (The Hague, The Netherlands, April 1-6, 2000). ACM
Press, New York, USA, 2000, 17-24.
[7] Cheverst, K., Davies N., and Mitchell K, and Efstratiou, C.
Usng Context as a Crystal Ball: Rewards and Pitfalls.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 5, 1 (January 2001), 811.
[8] Cheverst, K., Davies N., and Mitchell K. The Role of
Adaptive Hypermedia within a Context-Aware Tourist
GUIDE. Communications of the ACM, Special Issue on
Adaptive Web-based Systems and Adaptive Hypermedia, 45,
5, (May 2002), 47-51.
[9] Cheverst, K., Davies N., and Mitchell K. A Reflective Study
of the Guide System. Workshop on Mobile Guides at the
Fifth International Symposium on Human-Computer
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI
2003) (Udine, Italy, September 8-11, 2003).
[10] Egger, F. N. Affective Design of e-Commerce User
Interfaces: How to Maximise Perceived Trustworthiness. In
Proceedings of The International Conference on Affective
Human Factors Design (Singapore, June 26-29, 2001).
Asean Academic Press: London, UK, 2001, 317-324.
[11] Gaver, W. W., and Beaver, J. and Benford, S. Ambiguity as
a resource for design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
’03) (Fort Lauderdale, USA, April 5-10, 2003). ACM Press,
New York, USA, 2003, 233-240.
[12] Graham, C., and Kjeldskov, J. Indexical Representations for
Context-Aware Mobile Devices. In Proceedings of The
IADIS e-Society Conference (IADIS 2003) (Lisbon,
Portugal, June 3-6, 2003). IADIS Press, Lisbon, Portugal,
373-380.
[13] Green, T. R. G., and Petre, M. J. Usability analysis of visual
programming environments: a ‘cognitive dimensions’
framework. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 7
(1996), 131-174.
[14] Gutwin, C. and Greenberg, S. Design for Individuals, Design
for Groups: Tradeoffs between Power and Workspace
Awareness. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’98)
(Seattle, United States, November 14 - 18, 2000). ACM
Press, New York, USA, 1998, 207-216.
[15] Kray, C. Situated Interaction on Spatial Topics. Ph.D.
Thesis, Computer Science Department, University of
Saarland, Saarbrücken, Germany, 2003.
[16] Kray, C., and Baus, J. A survey of mobile guides. Workshop
on Mobile Guides at the Fifth International Symposium on
Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services (MobileHCI 2003) (Udine, Italy, September 8-11,
2003).

[17] Pearsall, J. (ed.) The New Oxford Dictionary of English.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2001.
[18] Pedell S., Graham C., Kjeldskov J., and Davies J. Mobile
Evaluation: What the Metadata and the data told us. In
Proceedings of the Annual Conference for the CHI Special
Interest Group of the Ergonomics Society of Australia
(OzCHI 2003) (Brisbane, Australia, November 26-28, 2003).
CHISIG: Brisbane, Australia, 96-105.
[19] Preece, J., Rogers, Y., Sharp, H., Benyon, D., Holland, S.,
and Carey, T. Human-Computer Interaction. Addison
Wesley, Wokingham, UK, 1994.
[20] Preece, J., Rogers, Y., and Sharp, H. Interaction Design:
Beyond Human-Computer Interaction. John Wiley & Sons
Inc., New York, USA, 2002.
[21] Riegelsberger, J., Sasse, M. A., and McCarthy, J. D. Shiny
Happy People Building Trust? Photos on e-Commerce
Website and Consumer Trust. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
’03) (Fort Lauderdale, USA, April 5-10, 2003). ACM Press,
New York, NY, 2003, 121-128.
[22] Schmidt-Belz, B. Aspects of User Trust in Mobile Guides.
Workshop on Mobile Guides at the Fifth International
Symposium on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile
Devices and Services (MobileHCI 2003) (Udine, Italy,
September 8-11, 2003).
[23] Sheridan, T. B. Rumination on automation. Annual Reviews
in Control, 25 (1998), 89-97.

[24] Siau, K., and Shen, Z. Building Customer Trust in Mobile
Commerce. Communications of the ACM, 46, 4 (April 2003),
91-94.
[25] Sillence, E., Briggs, P., Fishwick, L., and Harris, P. Trust
and Mistrust of Online Health Sites. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’04) (Vienna, Austria, April 24-29, 2004).
ACM Press, New York, USA, 2004, 663-670.
[26] Smith J., Mackaness W., Kealy A.,and Williamson I. Spatial
Data Infrastructure Requirements for Mobile Location Based
Journey Planning. Transactions in GIS, 8, 1 (January 2004),
23-44.
[27] Strauss, A. L. & Corbin, J. Grounded Theory in Practice.
Sage Publications, 1997.
[28] Thimbleby H. User interface design. ACM Press, New York,
1990
[29] Vetere F., Howard S., Pedell S., and Balbo S. Walking
Through Mobile Use: Novel Heuristics and Their
Application. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference for
the CHI Special Interest Group of the Ergonomics Society of
Australia (OzCHI 2003) (Brisbane, Australia, November 2628, 2003). CHISIG: Brisbane, Australia, 24-32.
[30] Zancanaro, M., Stock, O., and Alfaro, I. Using Cinematic
Techniques in a Multimedia Museum Guide. In Proceedings
of Museums and the Web 2003. (Charlotte, USA, March 1922, 2003).

