See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221504939

iMuse Mobile Tour: A personalized multimedia
museum guide opens to groups
Conference Paper in Proceedings - International Symposium on Computers and Communications · June 2011
DOI: 10.1109/ISCC.2011.5983968 · Source: DBLP

CITATIONS

READS

6

149

3 authors:
Athanasios Fevgas

Panagiota Tsompanopoulou

University of Thessaly

University of Thessaly

14 PUBLICATIONS 80 CITATIONS

44 PUBLICATIONS 247 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Panayiotis Bozanis
University of Thessaly
53 PUBLICATIONS 298 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

All in-text references underlined in blue are linked to publications on ResearchGate,
letting you access and read them immediately.

Available from: Athanasios Fevgas
Retrieved on: 18 September 2016

iMuse Mobile Tour: a personalized multimedia museum guide opens to groups
Athanasios Fevgas, Panagiota Tsompanopoulou, and Panayiotis Bozanis
Centre for Research and Technology - Thessaly
(CE.RE.TE.TH)
Technology Park of Thessaly, 1st Industrial Area,
385 00 Volos, Greece
e-mails: {fevgas, yota, pbozanis}@inf.uth.gr

Abstract— In the recent years, there is a growing interest in
exploiting the advances of mobile and pervasive computing to
museum environments. A mobile museum guide, named iMuse
Mobile Tour is presented in this paper. The guide utilizes UHF
RFID technology to provide context aware information
services. It comprises predefined and self-defined tours as well
as interactive games to stimulate learning. A group support
service is introduced, which enables group visitors to exploit
guidance services on their private mobile phones. The service
provides access to information retrieved by museum’s RFID
enabled devices.
Museum mobile guides, group support services, mobile
applications

I.

INTRODUCTION

Handheld devices with voice instructions are common in
museums for quite some time. Mobile computers are
becoming popular and many museums are already utilizing
them to provide tour services. A location aware, multi-device
museum guide which utilizes mobile guides and shared
screens is presented in [1]. The system monitors visitor‟s
behavior, including time spent in each exhibit, to personalize
user interface. It introduces single and multi user games to
improve visitors‟ learning experience and social interaction.
Many mobile guides provide visitors with the option to
design routes according to their personal interests. A
dynamic routing system is introduced in [2]. The system is
able to adapt routes designed by the visitors considering
already visited exhibits, changes in interest and user‟s
current location. It is implemented as a web application and
is available on visitors‟ personal devices.
According to [3] people usually visit museums in small
groups, e.g., families or friends. Thus, [4] aims to support
group of visitors by providing a context-aware messaging
service. The service enables visitors to exchange context
aware messages about exhibits. Messages are sent to an
individual or a group, and can be delivered immediately (as
SMS) or when certain conditions are satisfied (virtual “postit”).
Most mobile museum guides use specialized hardware or
require software installation on visitors‟ personal devices. A
museum tour guide system on visitors‟ mobile phones is
presented in [5]. The proposed system runs using AJAX on

Department of Computer and Communication
Engineering
University of Thessaly
Glavani 37, 382 21 Volos, Greece

web browsers and does not require any other software
installation. More specifically, it uses reverse AJAX and
Bluetooth to provide context aware push services. Bluetooth
replenished devices named Media Spots, are placed on
selected exhibits in order to inform a server for new detected
visitors near-by. The server responses by automatically
updating exhibit information in visitor‟s web browser.
Mobile museum guides, like [6], use LF RFIDs to
provide location aware services, but the short reading range
of this technology forces user to stand very close to the
exhibits. This is not always feasible in museum
environments and certainly is inconvenient for the visitors.
To overcome this issue, some research projects, e.g., [1]
adopted active RFID technology. However, there is a
difficulty to distinguish between closely placed active tags,
due to long reading range. In [1] tags represent data for more
than one exhibit, restricting the granularity of information
that can be provided directly. The usage of UHF RFID
passive tag technology in museum tours was investigated in
our previous work [7] and an initial experiment was realized
in Archeological Museum of Volos, Greece. The proposed
system, entitled iMuse Mobile Tour, uses UHF RFID tags
attached to museum‟s showcases to link exhibits to
multimedia information. It supports multilingual and multiaudience content for free-style and pre-designed tours. The
system was implemented on a mobile reader (UHF GUN) by
iDtronic1.
iMuse Mobile Tour is enhanced to support self-defined
tours and interactive educational games. A context-aware
group support service that enables the delivery of exhibit
information to the members of a group is also developed.
The service aims to group of visitors equipped with a mobile
guide device and pushes the accessed information to each
visitor‟s private smart phone. The system is fully deployed to
the Archeological Museum of Volos and the first visitor
experiences are presented in this paper.
The features of iMuse Mobile Guide are discussed in
Section II. Section III describes the group support service
and Section IV presents system‟s architecture. Visitors‟
experiences are presented in Section V and lastly section VI
concludes the paper.

1

http://www.id-tronic.de/

Figure 1. iMuse Mobile guide screenshots

II.

THE MOBILE TOUR

The proposed system was deployed in seven lounges of
the Archeological Museum of Volos; tags were installed in
about 120 showcases. The tags were placed in non visible
positions, inside the showcases or behind informative signs,
in order to insure museum‟s aesthetics. The tags were

Figure 2. Visitor using iMuse Mobile Tour

marked with a neat sign. The operation of the iMuse Mobile
Guide is based on the handheld‟s integrated pistol grip. The
visitor should level at the RFID tag and pull handheld‟s
trigger to acquire exhibit information (cf Fig. 2).
Initially, a welcome screen is appeared when the visitor
gets the mobile device by Museum‟s information desk. A
short video presentation illustrates the handheld‟s usage.
Prior to using of the Guide, the visitor should set up his
profile by choosing his language and audience type.
Currently, the information is available for adults, children
and experts, in Greek, English and French. Children‟s profile

provides simple descriptions made for kids, while expert‟s
one provides access to more detailed information (e.g.,
bibliographic references related to the exhibits, etc.).
During free style tours, visitors are able to explore the
museum in their pace and retrieve information about any
exhibit attracting their interest. A photo and a short
description are directly displayed on the guide‟s screen when
the visitor requests information for a showcase (cf Fig. 1(a)).
The description comes also as vocal message activated by a
button on the top of the display. The other two buttons on the
top of the screen provide access to videos and a photo gallery
related to the showcase. The videos are usually recorded in
excavation sites. The photo gallery provides photos from
excavations, specific artifacts in the showcase as well as
related artifacts in museums store. Most of the photo gallery
items are linked to additional more detailed information.
Pre-defined tours are composed by the archeologists and
specialize to a specific thematic entity of the museum.
Visitors have also the option to create their own tours using
certain criteria according to their profile. The criteria include
available time, class of the artifact (e.g., pottery, tools, coins,
etc.), era, while experts can also select excavation site (cf
Fig. 1(b)). In both tour types, the route is drawn with a red
line and the exhibits of interest are marked as green points
while user‟s position is marked as a blue point (cf Fig. 1(c)).
Selecting a green spot, an image tooltip box is activated that
presents information for the proposed showcase. Zoom
functionality is also available, via a button on the top of the
screen, to help visitors with Museum‟s arrangement. Exhibit
information is accessed like in free-style tours, by pulling the
pistol trigger.
Lastly, young visitors may select, from a list, an
interactive game to play. Games describe activities that users
should accomplish by locating the relative showcase and
scan it with the RFID reader (cf Fig. 1(d)). These activities
composed by an archaeologist that specializes to educational
programs.

Figure 3 iMuse Mobile Tour architecture

Games and predefined tours deal with the same subjects, and
are used as alternatives education methods.
III.

GROUP SUPPORT

As has been identified by previous works, people tend to
visit museums in small or bigger groups. Thus, many
research projects (check Section I) aim to support learning
for group members. Some of them propose multi-user games
and shared media, while others suggest context-aware
communications.
The members of a group may have different needs and
expectations from a museum tour (adults, children). It is not
even unusual to speak different languages (e.g., cruise ships
tourists). Thus, most of the modern mobile guides support
multilingual and multi-audience content. One could claim
that museums should be able to provide a mobile guide to
each visitor. But, purchasing and maintaining, a significant
number of mobile devices, is not always affordable. On the
other hand, smart-phones and lightweight internet tablets
with great features, as, high definition multi-touch screens,
Wi-Fi network and g-sensors are becoming very popular.
We propose a context-aware service that utilizes iMuse
Mobile Tour and visitors‟ personal smartphones to support
learning in groups. The service pushes exhibit information
that is accessed by an iMuse Mobile Tour device on group‟s
private devices without any prior software installation. A
typical usage scenario is as following. The leader of a group
receives iMuse Mobile handheld by the information desk and
enables group support service. He enters a nick name for the
group and optionally a pin number. As soon as, group
members join their smart-phones to museum‟s wireless
network and open the web browser, a page with all available
services is automatically loaded. Then, they can subscribe to
group‟s service by selecting the nickname and providing the
pin (if has been set). The iMuse Mobile Tour device acts as
group controller, exhibit information retrieved by it, is

automatically loaded to the subscribers‟ browsers. Each
subscriber is able to personalize information presentation by
changing his profile (language and audience type).
IV.

SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

Visitors have to locate and scan the RFID tags, using
Museum‟s handheld, in order to access exhibit information.
Thus, iMuse Mobile tour comes within „scanner metaphor‟
as expressed by [8]. In the other hand, the group support
service can be recognized as a „remote control metaphor‟.
Figure 3 depicts the architecture of iMuse Mobile Tour.
The system follows client-server architecture. The client
resides on the RFID reader and is developed in C#. The
mobile application consists of three modules, the RFID Tag
Identification module, the Request Information module and
the User Interaction Control module. The RFID Tag
Identification module uses a .NET library provided by the
handheld‟s manufacturer to configure and interrogate the
RFID reader. This introduces a level of abstraction of the
underling hardware to the upper layers of the application.
The Request Information module utilizes the retrieved RFID
data and service information (e.g., server address and
services‟ names) to format data requests for the server. Data
requests are structured as physical hyperlinks and responses
are received in html or xml. Specifically, exhibit information
is structured in html, while metadata (e.g., types of
multimedia available for an exhibit) are formatted in xml.
The metadata are used to adapt user interface to the available
information. User Interaction module is the core of iMuse
Mobile client and is wrapped around a .NET web browser
control. It implements application logic and handles user
interface.
The server side application is developed using PHP and
runs on an Apache web server. It is composed by a request
handling service and four tour aware services. Each one of
the core services is comprised by two modules: the Control

and the View module. The Control module implements the
data access and business logic, while the View module deals
with data representation. This approach isolates business
rules from the visual appearance of the application, enabling
the modification of the user interface, without affecting the
underlying business logic and vice versa.
The Request Control service (RCS) receives requests
from the mobile devices and dispatches them to the
appropriate service providing a single entry point to the
server application.
The Profile Control service (PCS) handles the user‟s
profile (i.e., language, audience type, etc). It processes data
fed by the visitor to set up his profile and line it to the other
services.
The Exhibit Information service (EIS) provides data and
metadata on the exhibits. Data may include text, images,
audio and video, while metadata specify the types of
multimedia that are available to a particular artifact.
Tour Coordination service (TCS) implements all required
processes in order to maintain the guided tours. TCS displays
a list with all available pre-defined tours that suit to visitor‟s
profile, as well as provides him a tool to configure his own
tours. In both cases, a free path finding algorithm is used to
determine the tour path in the museum‟s halls. The algorithm
(cf Fig. 4) receives as input set A, the current visitor location
s and a set of points of interest P, in no particular order, i.e.,
A = {s,P}. Then, it constructs a fully connected undirected
weighted graph G=(A,E,w), using as vertex set the input set
A, as edge set every pair of vertices (u,v) in A, and as weight
function w the minimum distances between every pair of
vertices (u,v) in A. The distances are calculated with the
provision of avoiding physical obstacles like walls and
showcases. Next, in O(|A|2log|A|) time, a 2-approximate
minimum cost tour t on G is constructed, based on a Euler
traversal of a Minimum Spanning Tree T of G [9]. The free
path p is extracted by simply traversing t, using s as the
starting vertex. Finally, the starting point s, the path p and the
points of interest P are drawn over museum‟s map image.
FreePath(A)
Input: The visitor position s and his/her points
of interest P
Output: An approximate minimum cost free path p
1. G = fully connected weighted graph on A, using
the minimum distances between every pair of
vertices in A;
2. Calculate a MST T of G;
3. Run an Euler traversal of T, eliminating
multiple visited vertices;
4. Let t be the resulting tour;
5. Then p is just a rotation of t, with s being
the first vertex of the sequence;

Figure 4. Free path algorithm

The Game service (GS) exposes a list of all the available
games matching to user profile and dispatches the scenario
of a selected game to the client. The game scenario, i.e.,
activities, relative showcases, and score, is wrapped in xml.
The Group Support service (GSS) differs in the aspect
that all the others services support iMuse Mobile tour client.

The GSS uses RFID data scanned by an RFID reader to push
exhibit information to visitors‟ personal mobile devices
following reverse AJAX design pattern. Only an AJAX
enabled web browser is required on the visitor‟s mobile to
access the service. As soon as a mobile joins to the service,
its web browser makes an asynchronous request to the
server. The server holds the request while waiting for a new
RFID tag read. Once new data is available, it sends the
response back to the client. The response is encoded in JSON
format and contains the scanned id and user profile
parameters. On the client side, the browser receives the
response, calls a processing routine and initiates another
request to the server, for new data. The response processing
routine creates an AJAX request to Exhibit Information
service using the gained exhibit id and profile parameters to
access exhibit information. GSS communication is depicted
in Fig. 5.

Figure 5 Group service, messages exchange

V.

EVALUATION

We evaluated our system in Archeological Museum of
Volos. 95 visitors participated to the evaluation; most of
them were secondary and high school students and their
teachers. They were asked to fill out questionnaires using a
scale from 1 to 5. The average age of the participants was 21
years old. 22 visitors had a university degree while the rest of
them had secondary school or high school degree. 57 of them
were considered as very familiar with the usage of electronic
mobile devices, while 38 as just familiar. All the users
attended a short introduction on the system and its main
features. Visitors were encouraged to use as many features as
they were felt comfortable.
The participants reported that iMuse Mobile Tour
stimulated their interest on the exhibits (MD=4.2, SD=0.81).
Moreover, they are planning to recommend the usage of the
system to their family/friends (MD=4.18, SD=0.83).
The archaeologists‟ pre-defined routes were found to
help the deeper understanding of the discussed particular
subjects (MD=4.26, SD=0.71), while the games were
characterized as amusing (MD=4.18, SD=0.77).
Most of the visitors stated that the usage of the mobile
guide is easy (MD=4.47, SD=0.57) and the system responses

fast (MD=4.26, SD=0.77). The organization of the
information in the user interface and the aesthetics is
satisfied (MD=4.13, SD=0.7).
Four small groups of visitors were interested to the group
support service. The response of the system was rated with
(MD=4.33, SD=0.7). The visitors appreciated the service and
they intended to recommend it to others (MD=4.78,
SD=0.44).
VI.

CONCLUSION

iMuse Mobile Tour is an already presented tour guide
system which utilizes UHF RFID technology to enrich
museum visiting experience. Here, it is expanded to support
self-defined tours and interactive games. The main
contribution of this paper is a group support service which
enables group members to exploit their own mobiles for
accessing exhibit information. The service pushes exhibit
information, accessed by an iMuse mobile tour device, on
group‟s private devices without requiring any software
installation. The system has been deployed in Archeological
Museum of Volos and the first evaluation results show that it
stimulated visitors‟ interest and enhanced their
understanding. The wide acceptance of the Group Support
service indicates that visitors are willing to use their own
devices to access exhibit information. This is beneficial for
the museums too, since they are not obligated to obtain and
maintain special devices.
Future work includes exploration of advances in
ubiquitous computing to provide scalable, efficient and cost
effective mobile tour guide services on visitors‟ personal
devices. Sensing technologies, like Near Field
Communications (NFC), are promising and will become
popular in the near future. Next steps also involve data
processing from a large set of visitors to identify their
interests and expectations and adapt the provided (or develop
new) services accordingly.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Iceland, Lichtenstein and
Norway through the EEA Financial mechanism under Grant
EL0043 and by the Greek State.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

G. Ghiani, F. Paterno, C. Santoro and L. D. Spano, “UbiCicero: A
location-aware, multi-device museum guide,” Interacting with
Computers, vol. 21, issue 4, Aug. 2009, pp. 288-303, 0953-5438,
doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2009.06.001.
W. R. van Hage, N. Stash, Y. Wang and L.M. Aroyo, “Finding your
way through the Rijksmuseum with an adaptive mobile museum
guide,” Proc. 7th Extended Semantic Web Conference (ESWC),
Springer Berlin, Jun. 2010, pp. 46-59, 10.1007/978-3-642-13486-9-4.
A. Woodruff, P. M. Aoki, A. Hurst and M. H. Szymanski, “The
guidebook, the friend and the room: visitor experience in a historic
house,” Extended Abstracts, ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI 2001), ACM, Mar. 2001, pp. 273-274,
doi:10.1145/634067.634229.
T. Kuflik, J. Sheidin, S. Jbara, D. Goren-Bar, P. Soffer, O. Stock, and
M. Zancanaro2, “Supporting small groups in the museum by contextaware communication services,” Proc. Int. Conference on Intelligent
User Interfaces (IUI '07), ACM, 2007, pp. 305-308,
doi:10.1145/1216295.1216353.
B. A. Takrouri, K. Detken, C. Martinez, M. K. Oja, S. Stein, L. Zhu,
and A. Schrader, “Mobile HolstenTour: contextualized multimedia
museum guide,” Proc. 6th Inter. Conference on Advances in Mobile
Computing and Multimedia (MoMM '08), ACM, 2008, pp. 460-463,
doi:10.1145/1497185.1497283.
J. Mantyjarvi, F. Paterno, Z. Salvador and C. Santoro, “Scan and tilt:
towards natural interaction for mobile museum guides,” Proc. 8th
Conference on Human-computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services (MobileHCI '06), ACM, 2006, pp. 191-194,
doi:10.1145/1152215.1152256.
A. Fevgas, P. Tsompanopoulou, A. Tsiovoulos, G. Drasidis and P.
Bozanis, “Utilizing UHF RFIDs to Enhance Museum Visiting
Experience,” Proc 14th Panhellenic Conference on Informatics (PCI
2010), IEEE Computer Society, Sep. 2010, pp. 16 – 20,
doi:10.1109/PCI.2010.19.
D. Raptis, N. Tselios and N. Avouris, “Context-based design of
mobile applications for museums: a survey of existing practices,”
Proc. 7th Inter Conference on Human Computer Interaction with
Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI '05), ACM, Sep. 2005, pp.
153-160, doi:10.1145/1085777.1085803.
V.V. Vazirani, “Approximation Algorithms,” Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2001.

