DRAFT VERSION
Moreno, L., Gálvez, M. C., Ruiz, B., & Martínez, P. (2008). Inclusion of
accessibility requirements in the design of electronic guides for museums. In
Computers Helping People with Special Needs (pp. 1101-1108). Springer
Berlin Heidelberg.

Inclusion of accessibility requirements in the design of
electronic guides for museums
Lourdes Moreno1,2, Mª Carmen Gálvez2, Belén Ruiz1,2, Paloma Martínez1,2
1

2

Computer Science Department, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid,
Avda. Universidad 30, 28911 Leganés, Madrid, Spain
The Spanish Centre of Captioning and Audio Description (CESyA)
Avda del Mar Mediterráneo, 22, 28914 Leganés Madrid
{lmoreno, bruiz, pmf }@inf.uc3m.es, mla@pa.uc3m.es

Abstract. Technology can be an integrative tool with which to facilitate
universal access to museums and their works via virtual guides that accompany
the user making the visit more inclusive and accessible. With this aim it is
necessary to keep in mind accessibility requirements which guide the design
and development process. Since there are no clear procedures for defining and
including these requirements, this paper presents a proposal for requirements
capture and definitions of accessibility mechanisms which assure their
integration, following studies and standards in the area of accessibility.
Keywords: Universal design, accessibility, electronic guide, virtual guide,
requirements, multimedia, caption, audio description, Sign Language, museums

1 Introduction
Access to museums and their works is a right for everyone. For this reason universal
access should be offered to all; special needs should not be a barrier for any visitor.
Nevertheless, there are barriers to access which for some groups are difficult to
overcome, such as those who are hearing or visually impaired. In most of these cases
a blind person cannot access a picture, nor can a deaf person follow the verbal
explanations of a guide or the audio of the videos which are shown. Other difficulties
for these visitors include problems moving about and finding their way through the
rooms, communicating with museum personnel, or asking for help.
In this respect technology plays an integrating role, offering alternatives for
overcoming barriers to accessibility and integrating all types of visitors. With this in
mind the GVAM (Spanish acronym for “Virtual Accessibility Museum Guides”)
project was born. This project is an initiative for the design of accessible electronic
guides which integrate all citizens in the application domain of Museums.
The contribution of this article encompasses the requirements capture in the
analysis phase. It presents the accessibility requirements which must be taken into
account and the mechanisms needed to carry out the project.

The GVAM is a project1 of the Spanish Ministry of Industry carried out by The
Spanish Centre of Captioning and Audio Description (CESyA)2, in collaboration with
Carlos III University of Madrid3 and the CNSE Foundation4. As a specific
application domain the Spanish museum, the Museo del Traje (The Costume
Museum)5, was used, but the aim is to obtain solutions which are easily adaptable to
different types of museums.
Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 describes the case study, indicating the
requirements considered to guarantee the basic objectives of the project (accessibility
and universal access) and how to include the requirements in the development
process. Finally, we offer some conclusions and areas for future research.

2 Related work
Currently, many museums, both public and private have set up initiatives to create
portable devices which make museum visits accessible to visitors with different types
of needs. These devices are of a diverse nature and they enrich the visitor’s
experience, though this is not their primary purpose. Although the examples in use do
not have all the features of an Accessible Virtual Guide, based on a universal design,
they generate a framework for work and innovation.
On the international scene, the Tate Modern Multimedia Tour of the Tate Modern
in London deserves mention. Its experimental phase was begun in November, 2003.
The Tate Modern BSL Tour was the first museum guide that included sign language,
and reflects the intention to facilitate access to all users. The PDA includes video clips
of the most outstanding pieces in the collection, as well as a visual presentation of
interactive contents, such as games and opinion surveys.
Along these same lines can be found the initiative of the Museo Nacional Centro
de Arte Reina Sofía de Madrid (The Reina Sofia National Museum) and the Museo
Guggenheim de Bilbao (The Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao), which has
incorporated a PDA support system using Windows Mobile, which gives visitors a
guided tour with LSE (Spanish sign language) and subtitles.
Works of interest in the domain of Museums which stand out are which proposes
adapting the museum’s own webpage to include a useful multimedia Accessible
Museum Guide which visitors can access from mobile devices [1], the use of voice
synthesizers applied to situation maps for the visually impaired in the Museum [2] or
interaction interfaces with the audio contents of a museum [3] which by means of left
or right turns, and together with a location system, allow users to navigate the
different audio contents found throughout the museum. The most advanced
technological application is that of gesture detection in the guide which uses a PDA
support allowing the user’s movements to be detected and, depending on their

1

FIT-350300-2007-45 Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology
www.cesya.es
3 www.uc3m.es
4 http://www.fundacioncnse.org/
5 http://museodeltraje.mcu.es/
2

2

direction or speed, translated into actions of selection, navigation or activation in the
user’s interface [4].
On the one hand, guaranteeing the accessibility and usability of the device requires
the extrapolation of concepts included in legislation, standards and other
recommendations regarding the standardization of requirements adapting them to the
context and specific domain of museums. On the other hand, they must also take into
account all those experiences of users which can clearly define the principal needs to
be considered in the design.
Regarding international regulations, the design takes into account the “ISO TS
16071-2003 for software accessibility” [5], in Spain the technical standards: “UNE
139801:2003. Requirements for software accessibility” [6], “UNE 139802:2003.
Requirements for hardware accessibility” [7] and “UNE 139803:2004. Requirements
for Web Page accessibility” [8], this last following the current legislation in Spain,
similar to the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG 1.0) [9]. More
specifically in the application of alternative contents for predicting accessibility such
as subtitling, audio descriptions and Sign Language the UNE 153010:2003[10], UNE
153020:2005 [11] and UNE 139804:2007 [12] norms were followed.
Usability criteria [13] and principles of Universal Design [14] were considered and
for standardization documents, the W3C as Web Content Accessibility Guidelines
(WCAG 1.0 and 2.0) [15] from WAI [16], and MWBP flip cards of best practices for
mobile Webs [17]. Relevant documents from the NCAM (National Center for
Accessible Media) were also reviewed as to their relation with multimedia
accessibility in multimedia [18] and self-navigation menus [19], among others works
as [20] [21].

3 Case Study
The objectives of the GVAM project are to create technological solutions via an
accessible portable device (Virtual Guide) which can be used by any museum visitor
and will include a museum positioning system. For the design and development of the
virtual guide, the study was approached from two perspectives: the requirements the
physical device hardware must fulfill to be accessible according to the Universal
Design principles, and the software accessibility requirements of the application
(interface and all its multimedia contents) which we will call the electronic guide.
This paper presents part of the results of the analysis of accessibility requirements for
electronic guides.
The methodology used in the design and development of the electronic guide
employed a user centered design methodology with inclusion that considers an
iterative development process with a continuous evaluation of the resulting artifacts
from each of the phases (analysis, design, and implementation), obtaining increments
of accessibility to feed back into the development process. These evaluations are
carried out using different techniques, but with the condition that the users play a
leading role and their opinions are decisive. To do this, the research work of
requirements capture presented in this paper was carried out in the form of interviews

with users and associations for the disabled, both to capture requirements as well as to
validate them.
This study follows the methodological framework Accessibility for Web
Applications (AWA), currently in its experimental phase. Although it is focused on
Web environments, due to its modular structure and universal treatment of
accessibility from the point of view of Requirements Engineering it can be applied in
this project. AWA works with accessibility in terms of both functional and nonfunctional requirements. Through the use of different techniques, all the Components
affected by accessibility directly or indirectly during the development process are
detected in the entire life cycle of the application. The aim is to detect and avoid
resulting accessibility problems which these affected components may cause and to
define and prepare Accessibility mechanisms as a tool. AWA aims to provide a
framework of technical support for dealing with accessibility in the process of design
and development from an Engineering perspective.
Thus, in the case of the electronic guide, we have detected different types of
Components: human, technological and interaction affected by accessibility.
Functional and non-functional requirements have also been included along with those
already contemplated in the system; for the achievement and traceability of these
requirements, Accessibility Mechanisms were defined which will be discussed later.
3.1.- Initial requirements of the project
The initial requirement is the design and development of a virtual guide in the domain
of the museum which comprises a software application (electronic guide) to be
installed in a hardware device (portable hardware device) and which displays the
museum contents in an accessible way.
The Costume Museum provides specific information such as features, contents,
thematic tours, etc. which it wished to offer visitors in the electronic guide. The
physical device was developed starting from optimization, in terms of ergonomic
accessibility, of a standard device such as the Samsung Q1 which includes a precise
positioning system and wireless connection.
In the next section additional requirements which were obtained for the electronic
guide are discussed.
3.2.- Accessibility requirements
To carry out the requirements capture, research must be carried out and all factors
intervening in the accessibility in a virtual museum environment must be considered.
A set of dependent components have been taken into account such as (A) Human
factors, that is, considering the entire public including those with special needs, (B)
Technological factors, related to what technology to use and related accessibility
guidelines to contribute accessibility to the electronic guide and digital contents, and
(C) User interaction with the virtual guide in the environment (museum), that is, what
criteria can be included to favor the accessibility of the rest of the components
indicated.

4

Human Factors
Many different aspects of the museum-visiting public must be taken into account as
well as ways to ensure their access to the electronic guide and its contents. We are
faced with a wide spectrum of the types of access that need to be covered: people with
sensory disabilities (hearing impairment, deafness, visual impairment, blindness) who
need alternative contents such as subtitles and videos in sign language for the deaf,
and audio descriptions in the videos or audio navigation for user instructions and
navigation menus in the guides for the blind.
In order to undertake such a diverse type of study always keeping accessibility in
mind, in the requirements capture the technique of Scenarios with characters was
used. With this technique it could be seen that certain solutions for avoiding barriers
to accessibility according to different groups of users were repeated. From there,
those common solutions were extracted and an approach was adopted to prepare the
mechanisms for accessibility which serve as way to “access options” in the guide
instead of offering different accessibility tools according to the “user group”. Thus,
functional diversity is achieved, with the clear approach of adapting the device to the
user.
Technological factors
According to the above analysis, “access options” for the guide and its contents were
defined. These accesses were organized according to the accessibility barriers found
when the visual and auditory bands of the guide cannot be used. From this, the
following access options were established as the most important:
1. Access with audio description in videos and audio navigation.
2. Access with subtitles in the videos and visual alerts before audio events.
3. Access with sign language in videos and visual alerts before audio events.
Other access with accessibility tools: high contrast models for the presentation, use of
magnifiers, attention to cognitive disabilities offering adapted contents, etc.
Additionally, there will be common criteria to apply to the different interface
elements and application contents regardless of the access that is activated, such as:
− Offering alternative text for images following accessibility and usability criteria.
− Criteria for accessibility and usability on how to design navigation menus (in the
top right corner, options from left to right).
− Adequate contrast of colors in the interface presentation and multimedia contents.
− Type of font to be used following studies which aid accessibility.
− Use of clear and simple language in the contents, which avoids reading-writing
cognitive barriers.
− Use of graphic elements and icons to represent and identify contents, application
features.
− Simplification in the navigation and data entry.
− Others.
Thus, the method used was to capture requirements and offer accessibility
mechanisms to apply throughout the development process; these mechanisms were
based on standards, regulations and relevant studies enumerated in section 2.
The user must be able to compatibilize the different access options and the
configuration should be usable and accessible. To do this, there are different

alternatives as to how to design and code it, for example, adaptable interfaces,
offering all the access possibilities in a configuration menu in the interface by
choosing the access desired. In both cases it was recommended that the application
have an underlying data model with meta-information of “Access for all” based on
standards [22] such as those used in e-learning applications.
Visitor-guide-museum interaction factors
There are accessibility aspects that must be kept in mind in the interaction with the
guide. One to point out is the positioning system (see Figure 2) of the device and the
wireless networks in the museums, providing the opportunity to help visitors in any
part of the museum, as well as offering a navigation system of the contents which,
though restricted, allows access to the great majority of the application’s contents.
This is a way to have a totally automatic visit according to the position of the visitor.
Various types of technology have been studied, and one proposal still in its
experimental and validation phase is the use of ZigBee technologies [23].

Fig. 2. Prototype of a graphic interface indicating the location of the user

Other internal aspects of the museum must be included as well, such as signposting
and publicity where these guides are distributed, where museum staff need to be
familiar with both the potential needs of users, the guide itself and its configuration
options.
3.3. – Accessibility mechanisms for the electronic guide
Table 1 shows the principal components affected by accessibility in the application,
and in relation with the different accesses defined which Accessibility Mechanisms to
prepare and their sources of reference. The abovementioned relevant studies on
standardization describe the guidelines for applying, list best practices for writing
subtitles, audio descriptions, self-navigation and sign language, and discuss how to
integrate them into the different application domains.
With all of these accessibility requirements, meetings were again organized with
personnel from the Museo del Traje (The Costume Museum), users and associations
representing them, in order to obtain an initial validation and begin the Design Phase.

6

These requirements continue to be validated and fed back into the following design
phases.
Table 1. Summary table of accessibility mechanisms for the design of electronic guides.
ACCESS WITH AUDIO DESCRIPTION
AND AUDIO NAVIGATION.

Components
affected by
accessibility

Accessibility
mechanisms

Normative,
standards, guides

ACCESS WITH CAPTION
Accessibility
mechanisms

ACCESS WITH SIGN LANGUAGE

Normative,
standards, guides

Accessibility
mechanisms

Normative,
standards, guides

Image

Alternative text

WCAG 1.0
(Guideline 1,
checkpoint 1.1)[9]
NCAM-Guideline A
[18]
UNE 153020:2005
[11]

Alternative text,
use of clear and
simple language

WCAG 1.0 (Guideline
1, checkpoint 1.1) [9]
NCAM-Guideline A
[18]
Usability criteria

Alternative text, use
of clear and simple
language
Sign language

WCAG 1.0
(Guideline 1,
checkpoint 1.1) [9]
Usability criteria

Text

Audio

WCAG 1.0
(Guideline 14) [9]

Use the clear and
simple language

WCAG 1.0 (Guideline
14) [9]

Use the clear and
simple language
Sign language

WCAG 1.0
(Guideline 14) [9]
Guidelinescwa14835/ [20]

Audio

Audio

UNE 153020:2005
[11]
WCAG 2.0
(Guideline 1.2 ; 1.2.3
success criteria) [15]
NCAM-Guideline H
[18]

Caption

UNE
153010:2003:[10]
NCAM-Guideline H
[18]

Sign language

Guidelinescwa14835/ [20]
WCAG 2.0
(Guideline 1.2 ; 1.2.5
success criteria) [15]

Video

Audio description

UNE 153020:2005
[11]
WCAG 2.0 Guideline
1.2 (1.2.3 success
criteria) [15]

Caption

UNE 153010:2003
[10]:

Sign language

Guidelinescwa14835/ [20]
WCAG 2.0
(Guideline 1.2 ; 1.2.3
success criteria) [15]

Navigation
menu

Audio navigation

UNE 153020:2005
[11]
NCAM Guide talking
menu [19]
WCAG 1.0
(Guideline 1) [9]

Specific icons to
achieve clarity in
navigation.
Visual alerts

WCAG 1.0 (Guideline
1,14) [9]
Cognitive
Ergonomics Group.
UGR [21]

Specific icons to
achieve clarity in
navigation.
Visual alerts

WCAG 1.0
(Guideline 1,14) [9]
Cognitive
Ergonomics Group.
UGR [21]

4. - Some conclusions and future work
This paper presents a proposal of accessibility requirements to consider in the design
and development of an electronic guide in the application domain of museums based
on standards, regulations and solid studies.
Future foreseeable research will include testing and evaluating the prototype that is
being developed. Furthermore, it would be desirable to prepare an expert’s report with
the collaboration of the organizations representing the disabled to be published and
distributed to museums and institutions. This report would be presented as a guide
with recommendations and best practices for including accessibility requirements in
Virtual Guides in the museum domain.

Referencias
1.

Colazzo, S.; Garzotto F.; Paolini P.. “Let's Go Mobile! Design Issues In Multichannel
‘Accessible’ Applications For Cultural Heritage”. Museums and the Web 2005, Toronto,
http://www.archimuse.com/mw2005/papers/colazzo/colazzo.html

2.

Daunys, G. y Lauruska, V. “Sonification System of Maps for Blinds” .En Stephanidis,
Constatine (ED.) UAHCI 2007, 4th International Conference on Universal Access in
Human-Computer Interaction, Proceedings, Part II. Serie: LNCS , Vol. 4555.
Wakkary, R., Hatala M. “Situated play in a tangible interface and adaptive audio museum
guide” en Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, Vol. 11, Nº 3, pp. 171. 2006.
http://www.springerlink.com/content/p1623t74xp6h861m
Santoro C., Paternò F., Ricci G., Leporini B. ” A Multimodal Mobile Museum Guide for
All” (2007). Mobile Interaction with the Real World (MIRW 2007). 2007.
http://www.medien.ifi.lmu.de/mirw2007/papers/MGuides2007_Santoro.pdf
International Organization for Standardization, ISO TS 16071-2003 refer to software
accessibility.
AENOR, Spanish technical standards. Standard UNE 139802:2003: Requirements for
software accessibility. http://www.aenor.es
AENOR, Spanish technical standards. UNE 139801:2003: Requirements for hardware
accessibility, http://www.aenor.es
AENOR, Spanish technical standards. Standard UNE 139803:2004: Requirements for
WebPages accessibility. http://www.aenor.es
W3C, Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0 (WCAG 1.0), 1999,
http://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/wcag.php
AENOR, Spanish technical standards. Standard UNE 153010:2003: Subtitled through
teletext. http://www.aenor.es
AENOR, Spanish technical standards. Standard UNE 153020:2005: Requirements for
audio description. http://www.aenor.es
AENOR, Spanish technical standards. Standard UNE 139804:2007 Requirements for the
use of Spanish Sign Language on computer networks. http://www.aenor.es
Nielsen,
J,
List
of
Usability
Heuristic.
1994,
http://www.useit.com/papers/heuristic/heuristic_list.html
Connell, B. R, Jones, M., Mace, R., Mueller, J., Mullick, A., Ostroff, E., Sanford, J.,
Steinfeld, E., Story, M., and Vanderheiden, G. "Principles of Universal Design." North
Carolina State University, The Center for Universal Design, 1997.
http://www.design.ncsu.edu/cud/univ_design/princ_overview.htm
W3C, Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 (WCAG 2.0), 2008,
http://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/wcag.php
W3C, Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI), http://www.w3.org/WAI/intro/accessibility
W3C, Mobile Web Best Practices and MWBP Flip Cards http://www.w3.org/Mobile/
NCAM, Freed G. and Rothberg M., Accessible Digital Media, Design Guidelines for
Electronic
Publications,
Multimedia
and
the
Web,
2006,
http://ncam.wgbh.org/cdrom/guideline/
NCAM, Schmidt, C. y Wlodkowski T.(2003). "A developer's Guide to Creating Talking
Menus
for
Set-top-Boxes
and
DVDs",
http://ncam.wgbh.org/resources/talkingmenus/all_print.html
Guidelines for making information accessible through sign language on the web (2003).
EUROPEAN
COMMITTEE
FOR
STANDARDIZATION,
in
ftp://cenftp1.cenorm.be/PUBLIC/CWAs/e-Europe/DFA/cwa14835-00-2003-Sep.pdf
Fajardo I., Cañas J. J., Salmerón L., Abascal J.: Towards a Cognitive Accessibility
Guideline based on Empirical Evidences of Deaf Users Web Interaction. HCI International
2003. Crete (Greece)
DC-AWG, 2005. ISO JTC1 SC36 WG7, AccessForAll: an Accessibility Framework ,
Dublin Core Accessibility Working Group, IMS Accessibility Working Group,
http://dublincore.org/accessibilitywiki/AccessForAllFramework
Gislason, D. 2007 Zigbee Wireless Networking. CMP Books. ISBN:1578201357

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

8

