Accelerat ing t he world's research.

Location Aware Mobile Interactive
Guides: Usability Issues
Patrizia Marti
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference …

Cite this paper

Downloaded from Academia.edu 

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of t he best relat ed papers 

Serving Visit or Communit ies: A Mediat ed Experience of t he Art s
Pat rizia Mart i, Mick O'Donnell
User-cent red Design of Flexible Hypermedia for a Mobile Guide: Reflect ions on t he HyperAudio Experie…
Daniela Pet relli
REXplorer: Using player-cent ered it erat ive design t echniques for pervasive game development
Delacruz Pet er

Location aware mobile interactive guides:
usability issues
Jonathan Broadbent°, Patrizia Marti*
°CB&J
77 rue du Cherche Midi, 75006, Paris, France
j.broadbent@cbj.fr
*University of Siena
Via del Giglio 14, 53100 Siena, Italy
marti@media.unisi.it

Abstract
This paper discusses the issues related to the application of wireless communication and
positioning technologies to the development of hand-held electronic tour guides. These issues are
discussed presenting HIPS, a project recently funded by the European Commission that aims at
developing a hand-held electronic tour guide allowing tourists to navigate both the physical space
and a related information space when visiting a museum or a city. HIPS detects the position of the
tourist and provides personalised and contextual information.
The methodological approach of the project plays a fundamental role for the development of such
a system: user-centred design and scenario-based design are means for assuring that the final
system is appropriate to the user and to the context of use. The usability issues of HIPS are also
discussed comparing its features to other audio guides like the one currently available in the
Louvre Museum.

1. Introduction
The integration of hand-held computing with wireless communications and positioning
technologies has enormous potential in many fields: location aware mobile devices that permit the
navigation of both a physical space and a related information space at the same time represent a
new interaction paradigm. While the applications of these technologies are (and will be)
predominantly in professional markets, ever decreasing costs will soon bring such systems to the
mass market. There ought to be, however, big differences between a system designed for a
captive audience such as in professional, "vertical" markets and systems designed for a "non
captive" audience such as the tourist/leisure market: the robustness (as perceived by the user) of
the system has to be defined differently and generally be much greater for the system to enjoy
success. This becomes particularly relevant in projects relying on brittle leading edge technology,
where factors such as cost, scale and physical constraints can significantly alter systems
performance in the real world (as opposed to the lab/demo).
1

The perception of robustness of the system by the intended audience of such a system depends
crucially on interactivity: where speed of response is not the only issue, but information
presentation, gradual degradation and effective feedback are just some other crucial elements.
Whereas issues such as data integrity, reliability, security etc. are significantly less important.
Quality of interaction can't (or shouldn't) be ensured without centring design on the user, as
opposed to, say, testing the validity of a data encryption algorithm .
We believe that for the development of such a system a user centred design methodology has a
fundamental role in avoiding "ideal world" fallacies with respect to systems performance, both
from the communications point of view and the precision of localisation. The human-centred
approach (Norman and Draper, 1986) is based on the key idea that placing the users at the centre
of the design and evaluation activities ensures that the system is designed to meet their needs. The
methodology is generally implemented through a spiral or iterative process model, characterised
by an iterative design with many cycles of "design - test with users - redesign", based on a massive
use of prototypes. This methodology is particularly important for deployment in the real world
where physical, geographical, historical and other factors contribute to the potential difficulty of
building an ideal infrastructure for the system: our research focuses on the development of a
system able to bind the physical constraints of the real world to the rich variety of options in an
information space. Information must be presented in a manner appropriate to the user and the
context. Where the context also implies the system's performance itself.

2. HIPS
The issues discussed in this paper refer to a project recently funded by the European Commission
within the I-Cube initiative (Esprit Long Term Research). I-Cube (an acronym for Intelligent
Information Interfaces) is a new European Programme that aims at promoting "human-centred
methodologies" for the design of tools supporting people in everyday working or leisure activities
. HIPS (Hyper-Interaction within Physical Space) is one of the projects of the I-Cube network,
and it is developed by an European consortium1. Its main objective is the development of new
interaction paradigms for navigating physical spaces.
HIPS is a hand-held electronic tour guide allowing tourists who visit a city or a museum to
navigate both the physical space and a related information space at the same time. HIPS guides
the tourists in the exploration of the physical environment, providing contextual and personalised
information by detecting the location of the user within the physical space.
The system guides the visitor generating audio messages: the user can get instructions for finding
items of interest, hear descriptions with references to items seen earlier and to ones that will
follow, ask for additional information and receive suggestions on alternative routes. The
presentation of information in HIPS will be dynamically generated, adaptive, multimodal, and
1

Partners of the HIPS Consortium are: three universities: University of Siena (I) - Project Coordinator, University
of Edinburgh (UK), University College of Dublin (IR); three research institutes: IRST (I), GMD (D), SINTEF
(N); an industry: ALCATEL-SIETTE (I); a SME: CB&J (F).

2

integrated with maps and spatial directions. When interacting with the user, HIPS will integrate
user's requests, the user-model, the history of previous browsing and the physical location at the
moment of the query, in order to provide contextual and personalised information. In order to
compose context-sensitive multimodal answers to users' requests HIPS will combine small,
modular pieces of information of different kinds (audio, video, text) and will be able to identify
the situation and to select the presentation form which is appropriate in that context. Furthermore
the information content provided by HIPS will vary according to the user's location, preferences
and to the information already given.
From a hardware point of view HIPS will be based on a client-server model where the clients
("hippies" for short) that visitors will carry around will be pen driven palmtop computers with a
screen, headphones and no keyboard. Localisation will be performed by various means: infrared,
radio and GPS. Connectivity to the server will be wireless.
3. Audio Guides in the Louvre Museum
As a concrete example of the kinds of issues that usability addresses in practice, we will point out
some of the problems ( and suggest some solutions) of the audio guide available in the Louvre
Museum. We chose these audio guides as they are a relatively simple system and raise points
relevant to HIPS, bear in mind, however, that these are merely observations from a cursory glance
(as users) at the devices from a recent visit to the museum and we did not have the opportunity of
applying the usability methodology we advocate.
The hardware for the audio guide resembles a large telephone handset: there's a speaker at one
end, a number keypad, a small LCD display, and four additional buttons: play/pause, stop/cancel,
rewind/fast forward and volume control. The handset is handed out together with a 4 page leaflet
listing the items that have an audio presentation.
The audio guide provides commentaries for a limited number of the items on display in the
museum. To hear an audio snippet for a particular piece, the user must enter a three digit code on
the keypad (that gets displayed on the LCD) and press PLAY. The codes are listed on the leaflet
and displayed alongside the works of art.
The handset is large enough that users would not inadvertently put it in their pocket and forget to
return it; however, the principal means of assuring the return of the hardware is that one must
leave a credit card or passport as a deposit for the guide. The guide staff places the receipt for the
document inside the clear folder holding the leaflet. This is a very effective forcing function to
avoid tourists losing the receipt thus slowing down the guide turn-over process; this has he
significant effect of changing the status of the textual list from mere "paper" ( to crumple up, lose,
throw away) to an important part of the audio guide system. The audio guide, given the new
"accidental" importance of the leaflet, becomes in effect a system with two parts: a written paper
component in addition to the handset audio part.
The leaflet is starkly minimalist: a listing of the items covered by the audio guide alongside their
code number. The items are in groups such as "French Paintings" "Italian Paintings" "Greek and
Roman Sculpture". Each page also corresponds to a wing of the museum, also highlighted on a
3

small plan at the top of the page. Each entry is as follows: the room number the piece is in, the
author (or origin) of the work, the name of the piece, and the guide code number. The minimalism
of the leaflet leads us to believe that the designers of the system did not envisage the importance
afforded to it by the users (or by the placement of the receipt).
A few enhancements to the leaflet would enhance the usability of the system as a whole:
• Detailed plans of the museum would aid navigation. For example they could show the layout
of the rooms within a wing and the rooms' name or number, possibly also indicate within the
rooms the location of the pieces (to avoid the user from having to scan the whole room to find
the number tags).
• Indeed the presentation could be more location centric, and be centred on plans of the wings
of the museum.
• Small black and white pictures of the pieces would help in recognising the less familiar items.

3.1 The handset interface:
The first thing that an interface designer would notice about the handset, is that the numeric
keypad uses the telephone layout: there are two layouts of numeric keypads that are standard: the
calculator layout and the telephone layout.
Audio Guide Layout
1 2 3
4 5 6
7 8 9
0 C
Calculator layout
C
7 8 9
4 5 6
1 2 3
0 .
Telephone Layout
1 2 3
4 5 6
7 8 9
* 0 #
The designers, given the resemblance in form and function of the guide to a telephone, made the
"right" choice. We couldn’t help noticing, however, that there is some “interference” of a
calculator layout in the handset. The “0” key is placed on the left below the 7 key, which is the
position for the “*” key on a phone, as opposed to centred below the “8” key, where one would
expect to find it: the “0” seems to follow the calculator layout as opposed to the phone one. This
is reinforced by the grouping of the stop/cancel button with the number keys: in a calculator this is
4

usually in the top left corner above the “7”, here it is at the bottom right, aligned with the “0” key,
in the position of the “#” key on a telephone keypad. The Stop/Cancel button would if anything
best be part of the other functional group of buttons that relate to audio controls: the volume,
ff/rew, play/pause buttons.
The issue here is not one of "correctness", but of fundamental usability: a layout of the keypad
that users are not used to, requires them to make the extra effort of consciously looking at the
numbers on the keypad.
Placing the cancel button together with the numbers, reinforces it’s “Cancel” meaning, and plays
down it’s “STOP” function. Indeed, the button does operate like a calculator’s cancel button in
that it clears the display. In effect then, the Stop function is a by-product of the cancel function.
There is some consistency in this approach, given that the guide starts playing the audio snippet
only once the PLAY button is pressed: thus one enters a code, then operates on it.
Unfortunately this mixing of metaphors, phone and calculator, is potentially confusing and gives
rise to a problem: if the user enters less than three digits, or a three digit code without an audio
clip associated to it, and then presses PLAY, the LCD displays “ERR”, indicating an error: not
the friendliest of messages.
It would, perhaps, be simpler for the user if the phone metaphor was carried the whole way
through:
• the user "dials" a number as in a phone call: once the third digit has been entered the handset
starts the audio clip. No need for the PLAY button, and thus no error messages if the user
enters less than three digits.
• If the three digit number does not correspond to a commentary, then a "Sorry wrong number"
audio clip could be played (which could also be in the form of an engaged sound).
• Alternatively, after the alert, the system could "redirect the call" to the closest number that
does have a commentary. Closeness could be computed arithmetically, but also in terms of
keypad "distance" (e.g. on a keypad is closer to 4 and 5 than to 3), or by using the last
"correct" number to guess where the visitor is likely to be.
Instructions on how to use the guide are given by the handset by entering "7" and pressing PLAY:
this is explained at the top of the leaflet and by the staff handing the guides out. A button labelled
with "?" or "i" (to maintain the language neutrality of the hardware) that played the instructions
might be a better solution.
There is also an ergonomic problem with the placement of the audio control buttons: when the
handset is held to the ear, the buttons are not easily accessible since they are opposite the mouth,
thus one can't see them while listening to the recording. Given that the best feedback is the audio
content itself, it would be preferable if one could operate the controls while holding the handset to
the ear. The controls could be placed on the side of the device, their shape indicating their
function: a wheel for the volume, a spring loaded rocker switch to advance and rewind. The
Play/Pause button or rather Pause/Resume (see suggestions above) could stay where it is,
especially if de-pausing automatically rewound the audio track a couple of seconds: this would
5

give time to the user to bring the handset to the ear and most importantly, would provide the
context for the spoken text.
A nice feature of the guide is that fast forward and rewind cause a traditional high pitched noise to
play: simulating a tape cassette is very effective feedback.
By exploiting the digital nature of the device, however, the audio commentaries for each piece
could be broken up into meaningful units ("paragraphs") and marked as such inaudibly, the fast
forward and rewind buttons could then be used to jump from paragraph to paragraph, as opposed
to advancing linearly. The same audio feedback should be kept nonetheless, so as not to confuse
users (who might press the button inadvertently).
The three digit codes correlate loosely with the classification of the works: thus "French
paintings" start with a 4, roman sculpture with a 5 and so on. An alternative organisation of the
codes could use the room numbering scheme: all items start with the two digit number of the
room they are in (there are less than 99 rooms) followed by a 1 for the first piece in the room, 2
for the second etc. (there are less than 9 pieces per room the guide describes). This would open
the possibility of using "0" for a quick guide to the room itself indicating where in the room the
commented pieces are to be found.
By making the room numbers the organisational principle of the coding scheme, the guide
becomes location centric, as opposed to "theme" centred, as it is presently. This pushes further the
"browsing" function of the guide, that is already intrinsic in the system. The users need only know
the number of the room they are in (which is displayed on the doors) to know what code to enter,
while the thematic scheme requires consultation of the leaflet or spotting the small tags, as only
the first digit is predictable.
What sets the audio guide apart from traditional tape cassette based tours is indeed the freedom
from fixed routes. Presentation is self-paced, and the user can browse through the museum at will.
Location-centricity enhances browsability as it is the "flattest" organisation possible: no structure
is super imposed on the collection. In a museum or exhibition, structure is imposed anyway by the
physical layout and organisation of the exhibits. Location centricity, then, allows that same
structure to percolate to the guide.
This seems particularly relevant in the case of guides, such as the Louvre one, that are "pull" only:
information is "pulled" by the users, where, when and if they desire. The opposite case of a "push"
only guide, is the traditional tape tour - the user has no input and passively receives information
(prototypical examples of "Push" and "Pull" are television and the web respectively).
What distinguishes HIPS as an information appliance is it's potential as both a pull and a push
system. On the one hand it can be used to facilitate browsing: the user pulls information simply by
standing in front of an exhibit and walking around; on the other, it can be used to push
information, by guiding the user along predetermined routes. Clearly, most interesting are the
applications of HIPS that mix the two paradigms, as we hope to have shown in the short scenarios
above.

6

In conclusion, usability testing would have spotted all of the issues discussed above and
uncovered others that we haven't noticed; a proper design test redesign cycle would also spot
problems with our suggestions made above. For example, user testing could indicate the relative
importance of features of the system. Maybe, it turns out that visitors never use the fast forward
and rewind buttons, and that actually removing them leads to a system that is easier to use
altogether (as there are less buttons to get confused by).
4. User centred design
One of the main novelties of the HIPS project is the type of development process that will be
followed: a User Centred Design process.
User-centred design processes are characterised by:
• an appropriate allocation of function between user and system;
• iteration of design solutions;
• the active involvement of users;
• multi-disciplinary design teams (including both technical and human factors experts).
At each stage of design, user-centred activities are essential in order to understand and specify the
user and organisational needs, so that potential design solutions can be evaluated against these
needs. There are four essential types of activity:
• understand and specify the context of use: the nature of the users, their goals and tasks, and the
environment in which a product will be used;
• specify the user and organisational needs in terms of effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction;
and the allocation of function between users and the system;
• produce designs and prototypes of plausible solutions;
• evaluate solutions against user criteria, preferably by testing them with representative users
(Nielsen, 1993) .
User Centred Design is successfully used in the development of professional applications which
require a high quality of adaptation of new technologies to the work environment. It is much less
common as a development process for the design of multimedia applications and tools for the
tourist community. In fact we feel that when you design a multimedia system you must pay special
attention to the entire context in which the system will be used in terms of the users and what they
will do with the system, as well as technical aspects such as what platforms the system is likely to
be running on.
Our commitment in HIPS towards user centred design will be realised by a strong involvement of
users in all phases of design and development. At the initial phase of design generally called
Requirements analysis we will analyse user characteristics and involve users in scenario making in
order to guide the functional design. During development we will follow an iterative development
process that will be characterised by steps of design/user evaluation/development/ user evaluation.
Each step of development will be tested on site with potential final users of the system.

7

4.1 User testing and iterative development
At various stages of development the prototypes of HIPS will be installed in the Museum of Santa
Maria della Scala and users will be asked to manipulate the tool. During these tests we will carry
out a number of measures and observations:
•
the time to complete a task such as following a suggested path in the museum
•
the success rate in retrieving some information stored on the server
•
the typical errors that are made using the interface
•
the satisfaction and fun users experience in using HIPS
The objective of these tests are to guide the design of the user interface by eliminating the sources
of confusion and frustration, but also to identify those aspects of the user/machine interaction that
are most enjoyable and fruitful for a visitor of a museum.
During the test we will use a number of well established usability techniques to collect data on
users’ interactions :
•
videotape of the users in context using the tool
•
questionnaires of user satisfaction (SUMI is a well established questionnaire for measuring
user satisfaction)
•
time and error measures
In some cases, probably in the first stages of development when the system will be only partially
functioning we will use test techniques closer to diagnostic evaluations, carried out on mock-ups
and other intermediate prototypes (Lindgaard, 1994). This will involve :
• focus groups
• heuristic evaluation
• analytic evaluation to analyse and predict the performance of error-free tasks in terms of the
physical and cognitive operations that must be carried out.
• observational evaluation, providing information about what the users do when interacting with
the prototypes. Direct observation, video recording, software logging, interactive observation
(wizard of Oz), verbal protocols are typical techniques available for this kind of evaluation.

5. Scenarios for functional definition
Scenario building is one of our main design techniques to explore new forms of interaction in
which the physical environment is able to react to human behaviour, using the palmtop as a
mediator. This activity involves the creation of realistic scenarios focused on identifying the
features of potential users that may be exploited to adapt the system's behaviour, the way in which
people can share the experience, for example leaving annotations that other people can reuse and
investigating the peculiarity of mapping a hypermedia structure upon a physical space.
Scenario-based design (Carroll, 1995) is a method that allows designers and users to describe
existing activities or to envision new activities that can be produced by the interaction with a new
artefact. A scenario is intended to detail a usage situation and to document step-by-step actions
8

performed by the users (Lewis & Rieman, 1993). It is usually represented by textual, pictorial or
diagrammatic descriptions and can be used in different stages of the development process of an
artefact. Nielsen (Nielsen, 1995) states that scenarios can be used throughout all the system
development life cycle and discusses seven applications including diary scenarios for data
gathering, brainstorming to envision new features of the system, scenarios for design and
prototyping, scenarios for heuristic evaluation, stereotypes scenarios for data analysis in
exploratory studies, scenarios for task-based user testing.
In what follows, we present the scenarios-based techniques as they have been used in the initial
phases of HIPS: requirements gathering and prototyping of early ideas.
Indeed, if we focus on the early stages on the development process, scenarios can be used to
characterise episodes or a sequence of activities like in a story. These stories provide the context
in which activities are carried out, giving insights about needs, difficulties and motivations people
have in particular contexts. In this respect, scenarios are methods for requirements gathering.
A second usage of scenario-based design in the early stages of the development process is the
depiction of how a new artefact can support a proposed course of actions. From this point of
view, scenarios are a prototyping method, a design proposal.
In HIPS we decided to use a scenario building technique to clarify our thoughts about what the
final prototype should be and its potential features and capabilities. The method we used consists
of a gradual development of some basic scenarios (Tognazzini, 1993) where details are
incrementally added. Key elements of our scenarios are the intended users (single or groups
characterised by the dimensions on which users can differ), their goals, other sources of
information accessed during the visit to a museum, the information generated by the user
themselves, the user needs, and a script describing a usage context.
From brainstorming sessions we started to envision possible usage scenarios of HIPS. In
particular a basic scenario was developed together with a series of more detailed micro-scenarios
describing trustworthy situations. These micro-scenarios describe possible alternative
environments in which HIPS might be played out.
In what follows three basic scenarios for HIPS are described in order to give a flavour of our use
of scenario-based design.
5.1 Guided tour scenario
John and Mary, two technophile tourists, are visiting Siena. They decide to try out the brand new
HIPS guide to the Piazza del Campo. First of all they listen to some brief instructions that
encourage them to enter some details about their preferences so that the system may be
customised to their likes and dislikes. They tap with a pen on the screen on various boxes and
lists. The system then asks what kind of a tour they would prefer: John, who likes sports, opts for
the Palio guide, while Mary opts for the history tour. The screen displays a plan of the Piazza
with a small "you are here" dot, that moves as they walk around. If that wasn't enough, they
notice that the plan rotates as they turn around so that it is always pointing in the right direction.
Mary sees a restaurant called "Al Mangia" and wonders whether it has something to do with the
Piazza: she looks up a list of items of interest, finds the Torre del Mangia, selects it and the screen
displays a crude picture of the Tower in front of her, and highlights it on the plan. A commentary
9

starts playing explaining the history of the tower, when it was built etc. she then starts walking
around the square, and as she approaches buildings, the guide gives her historical information on
the building and it's present function. What Mary likes, it that the commentary refers back to
things that were mentioned earlier and thus gives a context for the narrative. The explanations
also encourage her to see other items, highlighted on the plan, that are relevant to the
commentary.
Meantime John is having the Palio explained to him: the history of the contrade, anecdotes on the
races etc. He is encouraged to walk around the square and as he approaches the various "corners"
of the square, the guide tells him which contrada starts from there, and their achievements in the
Palio. John, wants more details on the race itself and so is directed towards the start line, and the
rules of the "mossa" (the running start) are explained. He then starts walking around the square
following the "race track", and as he proceeds the commentary tells him about this corner being
particularly dangerous, how the inclination of the square in that point affects the way the horses
are hoofed and so on. When he stops to buy an ice cream he doesn't have to stop the
commentary, because HIPS knows that he has stopped, and when he continues at a slower pace
(eating the ice cream) the commentary is more detailed, and contains more anecdotes. When John
and Mary sit down, after handing back the hippies, for a coffee, they have experienced two
completely different tours, and have something (for once) to talk about.
This scenario is intended to highlight the potential of HIPS in overlaying a rich information
structure onto a physical space. There are many situations, (outside, historical sites, protected
buildings) where it isn't possible to provide rich displays of information (as in a museum). The
only solution is for the visitors themselves to carry the information with them. The problem with
books is that they necessarily distract the visitor from actually looking at what they are there to
see. Audio guides are, in this sense, less intrusive on the visitor's experience. Making the audio
commentary location aware, leaves visitors the freedom to explore as they wish, rather than
forcing them along a fixed path. Adaptive information presentation, based on the route the user
has taken and their preferences enhances the clarity of the presentation and allows relevant
connections to be illustrated.
5.2 School visit scenario
A classroom has been studying basic biology: the food chain, the predator/prey balance,
parasitism etc.; their teacher decides to take the class on a field trip to the local natural history
museum. When the noisy, chaotic class arrives at the museum, the teacher hurries to the hippies
desk to check out the hippies she had booked three days earlier. After handing over her school ID
as a deposit, she collects all the devices. As she hands them out to the children she taps on
"student mode" on the screen, and selects the predator/pray educational game. She then sets up
her own hippy to be in "teacher mode"; a plan of the museum appears with little dots concentrated
all over the entrance of the museum. As the class moves on into the museum the teacher checks
that the student tracking function is working correctly: the dots move in synchrony with the
children. The teacher then explains the game to the children and divides them into two teams: the
predators and the prey. The children enter their names (actually rude and gory handles) and select

10

whether they are prey or predator. The teacher keeps her fingers crossed that the children will
behave and starts the game.
When the children put the headphones on, they hear a cacophony of animal noises, a jungle theme
for the Vincent Price voice that explains the game again (but its more funny than the teacher). The
predators and the prey hear different versions each specific to their team. After a couple of
minutes, Vincent Price sets them off for the real fun.
The goal of the game is simple: survival. The predator team has to identify from various clues
what animals are on their team, then find their designated prey. If they manage to find it they eat it
and survive. The prey team has the opposite task, first finding the prey then trying to detect the
predator (by finding it in the museum). If they spot a predator the prey is considered safe, and
thus it survives. The team with the most survivors wins.
Basically the game is a treasure hunt, where the clues are descriptions of the animals, presented
not just with speech but also using sound (from the environment: jungle, sea... made by the
animals: roars, snorts etc.) and simple diagrams, maps, pictures displayed on the screen. As in a
treasure hunt, the children might need intermediate steps to get the final clue (answering multiple
choice questions on the screen, finding related animals etc.). Once they finally identify the right
animal they must actually go and stand in front of it for the system to register that they "got it".
When a predator find its prey, or a prey spots its predator, the system acknowledges not just the
successful child, but also informs the unfortunate counterpart that he/she has been eaten (or
spotted). Meanwhile, the teacher can track the progress of the children, by seeing how the teams
are doing, which student has found what etc. She can also follow their movement around the
museum with the "kid tracker" function, that also allows her to search for specific children to see
where they are, and vice versa to find out who a specific "dot" on the tracker actually is.
When the game is over, or the teacher decides to stop it, the children are told the "final score" and
directed towards the meeting point.
This scenario raises various issues:
First of all we wanted to point out the potential of wirelessly networked devices for enhancing
group activities, where a group, even if displaced, can maintain contact and interact. A dimension
missing from audio based tours (that is instead a feature multimedia kiosks) is the social
dimension: families consulting the kiosks together, people looking over the shoulder of others: the
audio guides isolate users from their social context. The advantages of a system such as HIPS is
that the social aspects can be integrated (in part) as well. Here the interaction between children
was very limited and passed strictly through central control (the game), however more freeform
decentralised interaction is clearly possible (though using HIPS as a walkie talkie would be
overkill).
Secondly there is the issue of privacy that the "kid tracker" raises: in this context a "tracking"
function is fairly harmless, indeed it can be a safety feature where children are concerned;
however, the idea of being "tracked" is not exactly pleasant. Would such a function be acceptable
to a tour group (inverting the guide-group relationship : from having to be spotted buy the group
members by raising an umbrella to seeing where the individuals are) ? Would someone want to
receive advertisements targeted at impressionist lovers ? This is a serious issue, that we will have
to address, especially since HIPS will be designed to scale up to city levels.

11

Finally, with this scenario we wish to emphasise that adaptivity should also be on a macroscopic
scale, and that different "classes" of users should be addressed (and children are as different as
you can get).
5.3 Living Objects scenario
The two scenarios outlined above use the wireless, location aware characteristics of the HIPS
system to provide highly interactive guides to the exhibits of a museum; different as they are, they
have a core in common: a third party that introduces the items and provides commentary and
information. In this scenario we wish to turn this model inside out: here it is the exhibits
themselves that interact with the user. There is no deus ex machina to guide the user, the user is
immersed in an enriched environment, where objects have voices, make sounds, play music. At
the risk of being Disneyesque, we believe that interesting possibilities are opened up by such a
scenario.
John and Mary, our technophile tourists, check out two Hippies in the Maritime museum and
select the Living Museum "tour". As they enter the first room on Viking nautical history, they
immediately notice the background noise of the sea and Scandinavian voices shouting to each
other. As they approach one of the vessels on show, the noise fades further into the background
and a voice starts telling them of the exploits of the crew of the ship, how they sailed far from
home to the Shetland Islands. Moving further along, they notice how, as they pass exhibits, some
seem to call out to them. Alongside another boat they hear a voice telling them " Don't listen to
him and his stories about the Shetlands, you should hear about real sailors, and how we got across
the ocean..." they stop and hear the tales of a great Atlantic crossing. John and Mary then wander
off into the Roman section: the background theme is now a Ben Hur style Hollywood
interpretation of ancient roman life. A display of oars produces moaning and whiplashes, so they
stop and hear the tale of a slave on a trireme. Every now and then, the visitors get slightly
confused about where exactly the sounds are coming from, as the headphones don't give them
directional clues, but usually the content makes it quite clear which exhibit is addressing them;
anyway the screen on the device also shows a small picture of the exhibit that is currently
"speaking" so that they can identify it. An option that is also welcome (they did come to the
museum together, after all) is being able to switch off the voices and sounds and to simply leave
the "environmental" sounds, so that they can hear each other. The tour is minimally interactive, in
that it is mainly the physical location of the visitor that drives the presentations, however some
exhibits give the users the option of choosing between presentations: e.g. the captain of the ship
or the slave at the oars.
The scenario above is deliberately "cheap" and more appropriate for a wax museum than for a
"real" museum. We wanted to point out how a system such as HIPS also has potential ( and risks)
as an entertainment medium.
The scenario raises, however, other points beside the "edutainment" possibilities: a rich user
model coupled with a "push" data delivery model can be very powerful: information can be
narrowly targeted without being requested. Imagine possible messages from a personal HIPS
device in a city scale HIPS network: " Hey John, there's a 39 bus coming in 2 minutes to this stop

12

going to Piazza del Campo (that you asked me to direct you to)", "That Cary Grant movie you're
looking for is on sale in the store across the street".
HIPS can be used not just to tell users where they are (and deliver information accordingly) but
also to tell others where they are. While the privacy issue, already mentioned above, is serious,
there are many useful applications for such a model.

6. Leading edge technologies for tourist applications
From a technical point of view as well as a functional one, the HIPS system comprises two
distinct uses of wireless technology: location detection and wireless networking. The former is
clearly at the core of HIPS, but it could be argued that the latter is not strictly a necessary
component. One could envisage standalone devices that were simply location aware: a sort of
sophisticated GPS device. We believe however that the networking aspect is crucial for real world
deployment:
•

•

•
•

There are serious constraints on the storage capacity available on a handheld device (as
exemplified by the relatively small selection of audio clips in the Louvre Guide), while this
clearly does not apply to a networked device.
Centralising data allows a great simplification in "stock management": there is a single type of
device that has the appropriate tour "downloaded" to it, thus there is no need to decide how
many units have to be in one language as opposed to another, nor to guess the popularity of
one tour over another. Furthermore updating of information, new features, etc. can be dealt
with centrally and do not require reprogramming all the units.
The school visit scenario illustrates the rich potential of a networked system in enriching tours
with a social dimension that is only possible with a networked system.
Real time updating of information becomes possible, which offers powerful possibilities not
just in city wide scenarios (when is the bus coming?) but also in the context of museums (e.g.
a section being closed for renovations, a temporary exhibition, a painting on loan)

The table below contains in form of keywords an idea of the potentialities of HIPS in comparison
with other existing tour guide systems. The comparison is made among hippies, CD ROMs,
Multimedia kiosks, Audio tours, Tape cassette based tours, Books, Museum layout and nothing
(no guide at all). The features that are discussed are location (fixed, mobile), interactivity,
customisability, flexibility, content, multilinguality and constraints (physical constraints).

13

Location

HIPS

CD ROMs

Mobile

Fixed

Customisability

Flexibility

Content

Tape
cassette
tours
Mobile

Mobile

Pull
only

Push
only

Not
interactive

Not
interactive

Books

Nothing

Museum
layout

Push
&
Pull
Adaptive
user
model
Multiple
tours with
the same
equipment

Pull
only

Limited in
some
buildings
Pull
only

No

No

No

No

No

No

Hypertextual
structure

Hypertextual
structure

No

No

No

Flexible

Fixed

Fixed

Flexible

Fixed

Fixed

Structure is
super
imposed
onto the
collection
Fixed

You have
to look at
reproductio
ns

Distracts
from what
really
mattersitems
themselves

You are
elsewhere
Interactivity

MultiAudio
media
tours
Kiosks
Not outside Mobile

Multilinguality

Yes

Constraints

Localisation
system:
GPS, IR
sensors,
DECT

Two visits
(real and
virtual)
one
language at
time
You need a
computer

one set of
users at
time
Takes up
space
Needs
wiring

Best for
beautiful
places
Not so
good for
more
obscure
places
(e.g. ruins)

one
language at
time
Need to
enter
Codes
Small info
storage

one
language at
time
Different
tapes

one
language at
time
No weight
Cheap

Expensive

notes
Forced
Pacing

bookmarks

Small info
storage

7. Conclusions
The fundamental question with any leading edge technology, with it's corresponding higher costs,
is "is it worth it ?". We believe that the transformation of the user experience from one of
consultation, whether with an audio guide, a multimedia kiosk, a CD ROM or even a book, to one
of immersion in an information rich environment is extremely significant. The possibility of
overlaying multiple information structures over the physical world in a non intrusive fashion,
opens up new possibilities that other technologies do not allow.
A number of different issues related to the design of tour guides were discussed in this paper. In
particular we believe that the success of the "new generation" systems for tourist applications,
14

especially those exploiting leading edge technologies, strongly relies on the design philosophy
adopted during the development process: a deep and continuos focus on the users and the context
of use.

References
Carroll, J.M. (1995) Scenario-based Design, New York: Wiley & Sons.
Dumas, J.S. & Redish, J.C. (1993) A practical guide to usability testing. Norwood: Ablex
Publishing Corporation.
Lewis, C. & Rieman, J. (1993) Task-Centred User Interface Design: A Practical Introduction.
Boulder Colorado: University of Colorado.
ftp.cs.colorado.edu/pub/cs/distribs/clewis/HCI-Design-Book.
Lindgaard, G. (1994) Usability testing and system evaluation, London: Chapman & Hall.
Nielsen, J. (1993) Usability Engineering Boston: Academic Press.
Nielsen, J. (1995) "Scenarios in Discount Usability Engineering". In Carroll, J.M. (1995)
Scenario-based Design, New York: Wiley & Sons.
Norman, D. and Draper, S.W. (eds.) (1986), User Centered System design: New perspectives on
Human-Computer Interaction, Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates .
Tognazzini, B. (1992) Tog on Interface. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

15

