See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/311314532

Mobile Augmented Reality Guides in Cultural Heritage
Conference Paper · January 2016
DOI: 10.4108/eai.30-11-2016.2266954

CITATIONS

READS

33

2,388

5 authors, including:
Damianos Gavalas

Vlasios Kasapakis

University of the Aegean

University of the Aegean

203 PUBLICATIONS 4,094 CITATIONS

54 PUBLICATIONS 516 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Grammati Pantziou

Christos Zaroliagis

University of West Attica

University of Patras

168 PUBLICATIONS 2,985 CITATIONS

179 PUBLICATIONS 2,450 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Aminess View project

PROSEN View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Damianos Gavalas on 26 December 2016.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

Mobile Augmented Reality Guides in Cultural Heritage
Panagiotis Galatis
School of Science & Technology
Hellenic Open University
Patras, Greece

galatisp@gmail.com

Damianos Gavalas

Vlasios Kasapakis

Department of Cultural Technology
Department of Cultural Technology
and Communication, University of the and Communication, University of the
Aegean, Mytilene, Greece
Aegean, Mytilene, Greece
&
&
CTI, Patras, Greece
CTI, Patras, Greece

dgavalas@aegean.gr

v.kasapakis@aegean.gr

Grammati Pantziou

Christos Zaroliagis

Department of Informatics, Technological Educational
Institution of Athens, Athens, Greece
&
CTI, Patras, Greece

Department of Computer Engineering & Informatics,
University of Patras, Patras, Greece
&
CTI, Patras, Greece

pantziou@teiath.gr

zaro@ceid.upatras.gr

ABSTRACT

1. INTRODUCTION

Mobile augmented reality (MAR) technology creates
unprecedented possibilities for delivering engaging, immersive
experiences to the visitors of cultural heritage sites. Despite the
proliferation of available prototypes, the relevant literature still
lacks studies investigating the way that users interact with MAR
interfaces as well as identifying major usability problems and
technology acceptance factors. Herein, we present KnossosAR, a
MAR guide implemented for the archaeological site of Knossos (in
Crete, Greece) which serves as a testbed for pursuing the
abovementioned research objectives while also comparing the
(dis)advantages of MAR vs. map-based mobile interfaces in
outdoor cultural heritage sites. Among other technical
contributions, KnossosAR addresses the occlusion problem, which
is commonly encountered in location-based AR applications; that
is, it employs an efficient method for estimating the field of view
(FoV) of the user in order to handle situations wherein a point of
interest is occluded by a physical obstacle (e.g. building). We have
conducted field trials which provide preliminary evidence of the
efficiency, effectiveness and utility of KnossosAR (including the
incorporated FoV estimation approach).

The diffusion of smartphones and tablets has paved the way for a
multitude of mobile augmented reality (MAR) applications in
cultural heritage, most of which are museum guides, visually
augmenting physical exhibits with background or interpretive
information [1, 13]. Several among the known storytelling-driven
projects, which use AR to convey the history of a place in the
context of a guided tour, are mainly implemented for the outdoors
[1, 2, 16]; those use the device’s GPS receiver and inertial sensors,
typically, to superimpose virtual objects on the physical
environment framed by the camera’s display. For instance, the
mobile device may be used to display AR views of a building, to
receive additional location-based information, or to listen to audio
and 3D-enhanced narrations [6, 25].

CCS Concepts
• Software and its engineering➝Software creation and
management • Information systems➝Information systems
applications • Human-centered computing➝Human computer
interaction (HCI) • Human-centered computing➝Ubiquitous
and mobile computing.

Keywords
Augmented reality; mobile guide; cultural heritage; archaeological
site; Knossos; occlusion; user evaluation.

Despite the proliferation of the available prototypes, the relevant
literature still lacks studies about usability and technology
acceptance factors as regards the effective use of MAR technology
in outdoor cultural heritage applications. Our main focus is on
comparing the MAR interface in location-based guides against
alternative options like map-based or audio interfaces. The research
questions addressed in this article are: (a) whether the MAR
paradigm indeed involves a more natural and intuitive interface
than that of conventional two-dimensional maps; (b) what is the
actual quality of experience perceived by mobile users; (c) what are
the most desired characteristics of MAR and map-based paradigms,
i.e. what makes a practical, intuitive, and stimulating user interface.
To address our research objectives, we have implemented
KnossosAR as a case study. This is an outdoor MAR guide for the
Unesco world heritage site of Knossos, the largest Bronze Age
archaeological site on Crete (Greece) which is considered as the
oldest city in Europe.
On the course of the iterative development process pursued for
KnossosAR, we have encountered a critical usability problem dealt
with in numerous AR applications. This is the partial or full
occlusion of points of interest (POIs) by physical obstacles (e.g.
buildings). Those POIs are treated indiscriminately by mobile
location-based AR frameworks, regardless of whether they are
actually within the field of view (FoV) of the user or not. However,
displaying occluded objects (e.g. overlaying a marker or any sort of
interpretive information about a hidden POI) often results in
misconceptions and wrong pursuance of tasks amongst users [19,

22] thereby compromising the clarity and explicitness of AR
applications. Practically, the occlusion problem has been addressed
so far only in indoor environments. Although not being part of our
original research plans, occlusion handling represented a major
design consideration for KnossosAR. Namely, the feedback
received on early prototypes of KnossosAR (by the members of a
focus group) revealed the need for real-time FoV estimation in
MAR applications developed for outdoor archaeological sites.
KnossosAR has undergone field trials which provided preliminary
evidence of its efficiency, effectiveness and utility (including the
incorporated FoV estimation approach).
The remainder of this article is structured as follows: Section 2
presents previous research related to our work. Section 3 discusses
the design and implementation details of KnossosAR. Section 4
introduces the FoV estimation method incorporated in KnossosAR.
Section 5 discusses our main user evaluation findings. Finally,
Section 6 concludes our work.

2. RELATED WORK
Recent developments in mobile computing (such as the wide
penetration of mobile devices equipped with camera, GPS receiver
and inertial sensors) shaped a favorable technology landscape for
MAR applications. MAR services provide a novel interface to the
ubiquitous digital information in the physical world, hence serving
in great variety of application contexts [5].
Among others, MAR technology opens up unprecedented
possibilities to cultural organizations and institutions like museums
and archaeological societies/services which do not necessarily need
to invest in buying dedicated hardware infrastructure, but rather
take advantage of devices own by visitors. As a result, the MARbased guides developed for cultural heritage sites have proliferated
in the recent years. So far, the majority of relevant prototyped
applications are tailored to indoor environments employing
computer vision [13] or some sort of fiducial markers [7, 8] to
recognize exhibits.
However, the literature specifically focusing on outdoor MAR
without the use of bulky or cumbersome wearables [4, 23] is still
scarce. Moving a MAR application outdoors is particularly
challenging, especially when considering archaeological sites and
excavations where interactive storytelling and environmental
context could play a significant role in the user’s experience. Such
a system would require an intuitive human-computer interface
based on metaphors, hotspots, logical clues, delivered on mobile
device screens. The users would interact with augmented
information of the excavated objects and would be able to compare
artifacts over different historical periods [1].
Along this line, Mohammed-Ammin, et al. [16] presented a MAR
tour guide for visitors of the archaeological site of Arbela, Iraq. The
guide presents the complex and multifaceted history of the site,
including superimposed 3D models of buried layers left by
successive civilizations which inhabited the area. The user’s
location and nearby geo-tagged content is shown through a twodimensional map interface.
Ardito et al. [2] presented a MAR system designed to support
young students in learning history in the archaeological site of
Egnathia, in the Apulia region, Italy. The proposed system employs
a gamification approach to stimulate students in acquiring historical
notions, thereby making the archaeological visit more effective and
exciting.
Angelopoulou et al. [1] presented a multi-user MAR educational
iOS application for the archaeological site of Sutton Hoo (UK),
offering interpretive information for a group of Anglo-Saxon burial

mounds. The site combines indoor and outdoor POIs that need to
be connected. The AR tour is delivered in the form of a teamoriented puzzle game. A number of teams of children visitors are
cast into the role of investigators trying to solve a number of
puzzles that involve finding specific exhibits from the excavation
site.
The aforementioned projects have demonstrated the potential of
MAR technology as a means for delivering stimulating experiences
to the visitors of archaeological sites. Nevertheless, thorough
investigation is still needed to understand the way that users interact
with MAR interfaces, address usability problems and identify
technology acceptance factors. Even more so to compare the
relevant (dis)advantages of MAR vs. map-based mobile interfaces
in outdoor cultural heritage sites.

3. KNOSSOSAR: ITERATIVE DESIGN
PROCESS
The primary purpose of KnossosAR is to utilize MAR technology
to support guided tours of secondary school students (either alone
or in groups) while on educational visit on outdoor archaeological
sites. In particular, the educational and learning objectives for
students supported by KnossosAR have been specified in
consultation with educators and archaeologists, as follows:


Become acquainted with the palace of Knossos (architecture,
decoration, art of pottery and frescoes) and compare its
complexity with that of the Minotaurous maze.

Acquire basic knowledge about the Minoan Crete, its
sovereignty in the sea and the spread of the Minoan civilization
through trade.

Become acquainted with characteristic elements of life in the
Minoan Crete: occupations, housing, food, clothing and
toilette.

Comprehend the causes that led to the destruction of the
Minoan civilization.
Contemporary theories of learning suggest that the above listed
educational objectives should be pursued through approaching the
historical context revealed in Knossos experientially [14]. Namely,
KnossosAR could serve as a technological assistant to locate POIs
in the archaeological site and derive contextual interpretive
information via various media.
Requirements
analysis
•Identification of user
groups
•Interviews with
involved stakeholders
•Take into account user
acceptance criteria
•Determination of
functional and non‐
functional requirements

Official user
trials
•Questionnaire
editing
•Selection of
evaluators
•Trial executions
•Compilation of
questionnaire and
interviews

Application
design

Prototype
implementation

•Content selection
•Content authoring
•Use cases
•Selection of mobile
AR platform
•User interface
design (mockups)

Prototype
finalization
•Bug fixing
•Application
enhancements: audio
announcements, dual
AR/map view, hiding
of POIs occluded by
physical obstacles

Testing
•Lab tests
•Beta version
testing
•Evaluation by
focus groups

Figure 1. Illustration of KnossosAR development cycle.

Through using the application, students should be able to build
sufficient knowledge background by undertaking the role of
explorer, based on the principles of discovery and exploratory
learning. Collaborative and cooperative learning should also be
encouraged so as to capitalize on one another’s resources and
abilities and enable the development of social skills. Finally, the
application should cater for the emotional development of students.
Dominant emotions are expected to be the tension resulting from
the action, the joy of discovery, the fulfillment of achievement.
KnossosAR has been developed following an iterative software
development cycle (see Figure 1): requirements analysis; design;
prototype implementation; testing; prototype finalization; official
user evaluation.

3.1 Requirements analysis
The requirements analysis of KnossosAR adopted the Volere
methodology [17]. The application requirements have been elicited
by involved stakeholders (archaeologists experts in Knossos,
professional guides and curators from local cultural heritage
institutions, educators, students). Our requirements analysis also
consolidated ‘good practices’ derived from similar MAR projects
and general principles for usability design [3, 9]. The main
functional and non-functional requirements identified for
KnossosAR are as follows:










The application should support the autonomous tour guidance
of users in the archaeological site; users should be able to
follow their own explorative routes with their preferred pace
and be able to retrieve information about POIs/landmarks
under a variety of augmentation forms, including textual
descriptions, audio narrations, images and 3D graphics.
The application design should make no assumptions on any
kind of supportive infrastructure (e.g. WiFi installation,
attachment of fiducial markers on POIs); hence, it should be
developed upon a sensor-based AR framework and be able to
function as a standalone application so as not to be sensitive to
network disconnections and avoid roaming charges.
User input should be rare and limited.
The application should offer an intuitive interface so as not to
distract the user from his/her main visiting purpose, namely the
experiential exploration of the archeological site.
The application should support educational objectives as to
motivating students to discover information about specific
elements of the site.
The guided tour should be offered in a playful manner (i.e.
incorporate gamification elements) aiming at increasing the
user commitment and engagement in the exploration of the site.
The application design should be easy to replicate and port to
other cultural heritage sites.

3.2 Application design

The application content has been dictated by archeologists and
educators based on the rationale of selecting a set of POIs regarded
as being most important while also serving the learning objectives
of educational visits, as discussed earlier. Those POIs are:


The Throne Room with the famous alabaster throne and
frescoes, where it is speculated that King Minos met with the
priesthood.

1

https://github.com/phishman3579/android-augment-reality-framework

2

Some of the focus group members argued that the display of AR markers
based on proximity would be sound in a city guide wherein, for instance,
the user would like to know the restaurants located up to a certain
distance from his/her current location. Nevertheless, this is undesirable



The Stepped Portico (covered stairway) leading to the palace
complex.

The South Entrance, where the plaster relief “Prince of lilies”
or “Priest-king Relief” has been discovered.

The royal apartments where one can admire the natural
lighting system and air conditioning of premises and frescoes
like that of dolphins and sea urchins in the queen’s room.

The compartments with the giant storage jars, used in trade
shipment with other peoples in the Middle East, Egypt and the
Aegean.

The Sewer System, leading rainwater away from the palace
complex. In the same area there are signs of the great
destruction of the palace.
Upon the selection of POIs, we then proceeded to content
authoring: text (POI description) authoring, recording of audio
clips (narration of textual description), editing of photographs,
videos, etc.
The application design phase also involved the specification of a
number of use case scenarios. Namely, the detailed formal (UML)
definition of the interactions between the involved actors and the
application components to achieve specific goals (tasks).
Based on the use case diagrams we then derived the UI mockups
which exposed the basic functionality of the envisioned application
and served as a tool to solicit early feedback from archeologists and
educators as well as from the end users (students). This feedback
has been take into account so as to adjust several UI and interaction
elements prior to prototyping the application.

3.3 Iterative prototyping and testing
KnossosAR has been developed as a standalone application for the
Android platform. The Android Augmented Reality Framework1
has been chosen to support the projection of AR views as it also
facilitates the implementation of several desired features such as a
visual metaphor of a ‘radar’ used to display the location of POIs
(represented by dots) relatively to the user’s location and direction.
The development of KnossosAR comprised iterative prototyping
and testing phases. The output of each prototyping phase has
undergone extensive ‘lab’ tests as well as evaluation by focus
groups. The focus group comprised a team of three technologically
literate individuals who provided analytical feedback as regards
spotted software bugs as well as usability flaws and missing
functionality.
The first prototyping phase comprised the implementation of a fully
functional prototype. The interpretive information edited for the
selected POIs (see Section 3.2) has been incorporated into the AR
framework. In addition to the AR view, a standard map view has
been developed to offer users an alternative means for locating
POIs (the map view indicates both the current location of the user
and POI locations by color-coded markers). The most important
remarks and suggestions for improvements highlighted by the focus
group members during the first testing phase have been:


At some points, the AR view included markers for POIs hidden
from certain viewpoints as this has been the default function of
the AR framework. This often resulted in confusion and
misconception, therefore, it has been suggested to allow hiding
markers associated with occluded POIs2.

in the functional context of KnossosAR where the main purpose of the
user is to recognize POIs as s/he walks around the archaeological site.



While the application has been configured to automatically
display visual indications about annotated POIs when the user
came close to them, this often remained unnoticed as the users
typically walked around the site only occasionally checking
their device’s screen.

Figure 3. Ground plan of Knossos with color indication of
POIs (yellow), buildings obstructing the users’ view (red) and
ruins of zero height, hence, not regarded as obstacles (blue).
(a)

In order to implement audio announcements we have adopted
methods commonly practiced in acoustic spaces [20]. Upon
approaching a POI the user listens to a short audio message
announcing the POI’s identity (title). As a result, the users are
disengaged from continuously looking up their device’s screen.
Thus, they are left to focus on the actual exploration of the
archeological site and pursue a more relaxed visit style. In addition
to receiving audio notification, a popup panel provides the user
access to POI-relevant information (textual description, audio
narration, slide show) (see Figure 4). This panel also appears when
the user taps on a marker in the AR view.

(b)

Figure 2. (a) Displaying and (b) hiding an AR marker
associated with an occluded POI.
Based on the elicited feedback, the original prototype has been
adapted as follows:


The markers corresponding to occluded POIs have been
hidden. Essentially, this has been realized through the
incorporation of the FoV determination technique presented in
Section 4. To compensate for the hidden information, we have
opted to implement a third view (further to the AR and the map
views): a dual view which comprises a split screen combining
the AR and map views. This allows users to have a broader
perception if the site; namely, to locate POIs (in the map section
of the screen) which could otherwise remain unspotted due to
being out of the user’s FoV, thus, hidden in the AR view.

On the event of approaching a POI in less than 5 m distance,
the user is optionally notified via an audio announcement
and/or device’s vibration.
The hiding of AR markers associated with occluded POIs is
demonstrated in Figure 2. Figure 3 illustrates the ground plan of
Knossos designating POIs and obstacles.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4. (a) Popup panel providing access to interpretive
information relevant to a POI; (b) slide show.

Last, the dual AR/map view of KnossosAR is shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5. The dual view which combines the AR and map
views.

4. FIELD OF VIEW DETERMINATION
Höllerer et al. [10] have recognized the problem of POIs occluded
by physical obstacles (such as buildings) and argued that AR
projections should be appropriately adjusted to convey correct
depth information. The literature dealing with the occlusion
problem in AR mainly considers the occlusion of virtual objects by
real ones. Along this line, several works have focused on providing
depth perception through employing computer vision methods,
such as edge-based tracking [15, 21, 24] or marker-based tracking
[12]. These approaches either require (offline) registration of the
physical environment (therefore, they cannot be easily relocated
elsewhere) or involve computationally hard image-processing
tasks.
However, typical outdoor AR applications entail far stricter
requirements: real-time performance; anytime/anywhere execution
(hence, support for consuming open geodata, especially
topography/building data); suitability for executing on average
mobile equipment. Moreover, many applications would benefit
from accurately estimating the user’s FoV, which is a problem more
generic than occlusion estimation: FoV refers to the whole area
being within the user’s view in the 2D or 3D space, while occlusion
detection refers to testing the Line of Sight (LoS) condition
between the user and a specific point. Unlike existing methods, our
focus has been on methods for determining LoS/FoV while also
satisfying the above listed requirements of outdoor AR
applications.
To address the aforementioned issues, we prototyped an efficient
geolocative raycasting method which allows to detect buildings in
location-based AR applications, thereby reliably resolving the
object occlusion issue. Our method is inspired by the raycasting
technique utilized in video games to estimate the visibility of virtual
objects. Raycasting refers to the act of casting imaginary light
beams (rays) from a source location (typically the point of view of
the character or object controlled by the player) and recording the
objects hit by the rays [18]. Herein, we extend this idea in outdoor
AR applications wherein, unlike video games, the virtual space is
integrated with the physical one, which is not pre-registered and
occlusion is typically caused by surrounding buildings. Our
geolocative raycasting technique, titled Ray-Polygon Intersection
(RPI), suggests a portable scheme which may be incorporated in
any outdoor AR application and be utilized at any urban setting,
provided that sufficient topographical data exist.
3

Bearing refers to the angle of a moving object’s direction from the North.

It is noted that, in addition to the device’s exact location, RPI
requires the calculation of the device’s orientation (bearing3) based
on measurements taken from the accelerometer and magnetometer
sensors of the device. Thereafter, the bearing is set as the center of
the player’s FoV. The precise estimation of the player’s FoV (i.e.
the exact 2D polygon which delimits the player’s sight) may then
be undertaken by the approach discussed in the sequel.
Our FoV determination approach employs an efficient, geometric
ray intersection method. Initially, building polygons are
deconstructed to pairs of vertices, each referring to a polygon side
(line segment). We then generate a sequence of ray segments
degrees far from each other) from the
(consecutive rays are
leftmost to the rightmost FoV’s angle (
and
,
respectively) considering the current bearing of the device as the
bisector of the FoV’s angle. The edges of each ray segment are set
far
to the device’s location and the ray’s endmost point being
(maximum FoV distance). To determine FoV we then calculate the
intersection points among each ray segment and the building
polygon side lines. For each ray segment, the intersection point
which is nearest to the device is regarded as the furthest FoV point
along this particular ray. It is noted that, since no open geodata have
been available for the archaeological site of Knossos, the building
(polygon) coordinates in KnossosAR (both for the POIs and the
buildings that may possibly occlude POIs) have been manually
edited.

Figure 6. FoV determination utilizing the ray intersection
approach.
Figure 6 demonstrates our method through a simplified scenario
which involves five rays and a building polygon. The green circles
denote the endmost points of the five ray segments while the red
circles denote the intersection points of the rays with the building
polygon sides. The yellow-shadowed area (ABCDEF) represents
the estimated FoV polygon. Note that the accuracy of FoV
estimation depends on the density of rays (i.e. their in-between
angle). For instance, the triangle CC1C2 is erroneously considered
to be within the player’s FoV (the triangle’s area would be smaller
if rays were denser).
In KnossosAR, the intersection points among blocked rays and
their nearest polygons (or the endmost points of the non-blocked
ray segments) are saved in a vector; utilizing the Google Maps
Android API library, the application easily inspects whether a
particular location lies inside the FoV’s polygon. When considering
polygon-shaped POIs, those are regarded as non-occluded when
any of their vertices lies within the user’s estimated FoV.
It is noted that a detailed description of our RPI algorithm appears
in [11].

5. FIELD TRIALS
Elementary and secondary education schools often organize
educational visits to cultural institutions and heritage sites.
However, stimulating and retaining the interest of students often
proves a rather hard exercise. Archaeological sites are especially
challenging in the sense that students are guided around ruins of
ancient settlements that hardly reflect their original appearance and
purpose. The utility of MAR applications in answering ‘how did it
used to look like’ questions and engaging users in the educational
process appears as a reasonable hypothesis. However, evidence is
missing as user acceptance studies of MAR applications with
cultural heritage resources are rare [9].
Along this line, KnossosAR has been tested on site, through
‘formal’ field trials. The objectives of the field trials have not only
been to test the innovative functional elements of the application
(such as our occlusion handling method), but also to offer insights
on the way that similar applications are actually used and how the
AR views compare to alternative visualization means, such as the
map and the dual AR/map views.
(c)

Figure 7. Field trials: (a) Briefing of participants; (b)
browsing interpretive information about a POI; confirmation
of the ‘discovery’ of 4 (out of 6) POIs.

(a)

(b)

KnossosAR has been evaluated by 16 students (12 male, 4 female)
17-19 years old (average 17.6), in the context of an educational visit
in the archaeological site of Knossos4. The participants have tested
the application in four groups (of four individuals each) in order to
facilitate their live observation by the developers. The testing
sessions have been executed using tablet devices supplied by the
development team. Most (68.8%) of the students had visited the
archaeological site in the past, either privately or in the context of
an educational (school) visit. All of them have been experienced
mobile application users and familiar with mobile interactive map
interfaces. 62.5% have been aware of the existence of electronic
guides in museums and cultural heritage sites; however, only
12.5% had actually used one in the past. Notably, none of them has
been aware of the capabilities and usage of the AR applications.
Initially, the students have been briefed by the developers about the
main functional elements of KnossosAR. Students have been then
invited to participate in a ‘treasure hunting’-like game wherein the
objective has been to ‘discover’ (i.e. approach) the 6 selected POIs
(see Section 3.2) in a 30 min session. Upon the completion of the
evaluation session, the participants have been requested to fill in a
questionnaire so as to convey their overall quality of experience and
document any remarks. Finally, a semi-structured interview
followed in order to offer participants the opportunity to clarify any
issues and suggest further improvements. Figure 7 shows snapshots
from the KnossosAR field trials.
The questionnaire comprised two sections. The first section
(seeTable 1) aimed at eliciting the perceived value and quality of
experience of the participants about the application as a whole as
well as its individual functional elements. The participants
experienced no difficulty to get acquainted with the usage of the
application (S1). The incorporation of the AR views and the
gamification of the guided tour increased the fun element (S2). The
interpretive information consumed though the application allowed
participants to acquire new knowledge about then archaeological

4

A video recorded during the field trials is available from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RnohY2JdkzI

site (S3), while the visualization of the POIs assisted in locating
important points which otherwise would likely remain unnoticed
(S4). The occlusion handling technique (participants have been
informed during the briefing session that AR markers associated
with non-visible POIs would be hidden) has been positively
valuated (S5). Besides, some participants argued that they could
receive hints about the existence of occluded POIs through
inspecting the ‘radar’; this displayed visual indications of all ‘inrange’ POIs regardless of their visibility. The participants have
found useful most of the means provided for locating POIs within
the archaeological site (S6). Among them, the AR markers and the
audio messages announcing proximity to POIs have been most
highly appreciated. As regards the means for consuming
interpretive information, audio narration and images/photographs
have been the most commonly used (S7); reading textual
information has been less popular as it was claimed to distract the
user’s attention from looking at the POI itself. The overall valuation
of KnossosAR has been positive with respect to the perceived
quality of experience (S8). When prompted to characterize the AR
interface of the application in one sentence, the verbalization has
been around the concepts of entertainment and innovation (e.g.
‘fun’, ‘interesting’, ‘original’, ‘groundbreaking’) as well as
usefulness (e.g. ‘helpful’, ‘nice to have’).
Table 1. Overall valuation of KnossosAR using a likert scale:
1-5 (1:Not at all, 5: Very much).
Statement

Median Average

S1

The application has been easy to
use.

5

4.6

S2

The application has been pleasant
to use.

5

4.4

The usage of the application
allowed me to acquire knowledge
S3
about then archaeological site
(that I would miss otherwise).

4

4.1

The application assisted me to
locate points of interest within
S4
the archeological site (that I
would miss otherwise).

5

4.8

I have appreciated the hiding of
S5 AR markers representing POIs
out of my field of view.

4

3.9

The following application elements assisted me in
S6
locating points of interest within the archaeological site:
a

Floating (AR) markers

5

4.4

b

Radar

3

3.5

c

Interactive map (including visual
indication of the user’s current
location)

4

3.8

d

Audio (POI proximity)
announcement

5

4.8

The following application elements assisted me in
S7 eliciting interpretive information about points of
interest:
a

Audio narration

4

4.3

b

Textual information

3

2.9

c

Photographs

The overall quality of experience
S8 with the usage of the mobile
guide has been positive.

4

4

4

4.2

The next section of the questionnaire (see Table 2) aimed at
comparing the AR against the map and the dual AR/map interfaces
with respect to several criteria. Notably, half of the participants
indicated preference on the map environment as regards the ease of
use (Q1) (mainly due to their higher level of familiarity with alike
interfaces) with a 37.5% favoring the AR environment; the dual
environment has been the less preferred option as it required more
cognitive effort in order to synthesize the visual information
projected in the two screen parts. Participants appeared bifurcated
as regards the fun element of application usage among the AR and
the dual AR/map environments (Q2). However, their preference on
the AR view could be regarded somewhat biased due to the fact that
it has been new to all users. The participants found the AR markers
more functional and conspicuous than map markers (Q3) with some
arguing that the former have been more informative (as they
additionally included the POI title and distance info) and
discernible (due to being more sizeable and not overlapping among
them). On the other hand, the participants indicated slight
preference on the map environment as regards the ease in
interacting with (tapping on) the markers (Q4) with some stressing
out their ‘stability’ as opposed to the floating MAR markers whose
positioning has been very sensitive to devices’ orientation changes
(yet, some opposite views highlighted the significant overlap often
noticed in the map interface which required the adjustment of the
zoom level in order to distinguish individual markers). The dual
AR/map interface has been favored by the majority of respondents
as regards to the ease in locating and reaching nearby POIs (Q5) as
it combined the best of the two ‘worlds’: the intuitive orienteering
offered by AR (as it directly conveys the direction towards a POI)
and the broader view (and layout) of the archeological site offered
by the map interface which illustrated all POIs (regardless of their
visibility) without requiring any rotation (it has been commented
that the radar of the AR environment did not compensate that
deficiency). However, it should be noted that the dual environment
may be less practical in smartphone devices, due to their lower
screen resolution.
Table 2. Direct comparison among the three supported
information visualization environments.
AR
(including
the radar)

Map

Dual
(AR/map)
env/ment

Which environment
Q1 did you find easier to
use?

37.5%

50%

12.5%

Which environment
Q2 did you find more
pleasant to use?

50%

0%

50%

Which environment’s
Q3 markers did you find
more conspicuous?

75%

25%

N/A

Which environment’s
markers did you find
Q4
most easy to tap on?
(AR or map markers)

43.7%

56.3%

N/A

Question

Which environment
did you find more
Q5 helpful to locate and
reach nearby points
of interest?

25%

12.5%

62.5%

In the semi-structured interview held in the end of the testing
sessions, the participants have made several suggestions for further
improvements, such as:





Incorporation of richer interpretive information: 3D
reconstruction of selected ancient ruins; provision of
information about the archaeological site as a whole further to
the ‘fragmented’ information about POIs.
Use of visual clues (e.g. special color codes) to denote already
visited POIs.
Alternative ways to handle hidden POIs (i.e. those being out of
the user’s FoV): use of transparency for AR markers associated
with hidden POIs; provision of audio hints about hidden POIs.

6. CONCLUSION
This article introduced KnossosAR, an outdoor MAR guide
implemented for the Unesco world heritage archaeological site of
Knossos (in Crete, Greece). KnossosAR seamlessly integrates AR
projections of interpretive information in a non-linear storytelling
context. The application has served as a testbed to pursue our main
research objective; namely, to reveal usability problems and
identify technology acceptance factors with respect to the usage of
MAR technology as well as to compare MAR vs. map-based
mobile interfaces in outdoor cultural heritage sites.
Unlike existing outdoor AR applications, KnossosAR addresses the
occlusion problem by appropriately handling occluded
POIs/landmarks (commonly dealt with in location-based AR
applications) as suggested by members of a focus group who
evaluated an early version of our prototype. This is achieved
through employing a geolocative raycasting technique which
enables real-time detection of surrounding buildings and adapts AR
content accordingly.
The execution of user evaluation trials confirmed the perceived
usefulness, ease of use and enjoyment of KnossosAR. Our
evaluation findings largely match the conclusions of similar user
acceptance studies [9]. The combination of the physical objects
with the virtual information triggered the curiosity and stimulated
the interest of students to physically explore the archaeological site.
The use of MAR technology exposed students to an alternative
interaction style, which they easily mastered. Initial mistrust, gave
its place to a sense of accomplishment when they succeed in
locating the ‘hidden’ POIs.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been supported by the CIP-ICT-PSP-2013-2017
Programme under grant agreement no. 621133 (HoPE - “Holistic
Personal public Eco-mobility”).

8. REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

A. Angelopoulou, D. Economou, V. Bouki, A. Psarrou, L. Jin, C.
Pritchard, F. Kolyda, "Mobile augmented reality for cultural heritage",
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Mobile Wireless
Middleware, Operating Systems, and Applications, pp. 15-22, 2011.
C. Ardito, P. Buono, M.F. Costabile, R. Lanzilotti, T. Pederson,
"Mobile games to foster the learning of history at archaeological
sites", Proceedings of the Symposium on Visual Languages and
Human-Centric Computing, pp. 81-86, 2007.

[3]

M. Billinghurst, A. Duenser, "Augmented reality in the classroom",
Computer, 45, pp. 56-63, 2012.

[4]

G. Caggianese, P. Neroni, L. Gallo, "Natural interaction and wearable
augmented reality for the enjoyment of the cultural heritage in outdoor
conditions", Proceedings of the International Conference on
Augmented and Virtual Reality, pp. 267-282, 2014.

[5]

J. Carmigniani, B. Furht, M. Anisetti, P. Ceravolo, E. Damiani, M.
Ivkovic, "Augmented reality technologies, systems and applications",
Multimedia Tools and Applications, 5, pp. 341-377, 2011.

[6]

G. Casella, M. Coelho, "Augmented heritage: situating augmented
reality mobile apps in cultural heritage communication", Proceedings
of the International Conference on Information Systems and Design
of Communication, pp. 138-140, 2013.

[7]

T. Chatzidimitris, E. Kavakli, M. Economou, D. Gavalas, "Mobile
Augmented Reality edutainment applications for cultural institutions",
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Information,
Intelligence, Systems and Applications, pp. 1-4, 2013.

[8]

L. Greci, "An Augmented Reality Guide for Religious Museum",
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Augmented
Reality, Virtual Reality and Computer Graphics, pp. 280-289, 2016.

[9]

A. C. Haugstvedt, J. Krogstie, "Mobile augmented reality for cultural
heritage: A technology acceptance study", Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, pp. 247255, 2012.

[10] T. Höllerer, S. Feiner, D. Hallaway, B. Bell, M. Lanzagorta, D.
Brown, S. Julier, Y. Baillot, L. Rosenblum, "User interface
management techniques for collaborative mobile augmented reality",
Computers & Graphics, 25, pp. 799-810, 2001.
[11] V. Kasapakis, D. Gavalas, "Occlusion handling in outdoors
augmented reality games", Multimedia Tools and Applications, in
press.
[12] H. Kato, M. Billinghurst, I. Poupyrev, K. Imamoto, K. Tachibana,
"Virtual object manipulation on a table-top AR environment",
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Augmented Reality,
pp. 111-119, 2000.
[13] J. Keil, L. Pujol, M. Roussou, T. Engelke, M. Schmitt, U. Bockholt, S.
Eleftheratou, "A digital look at physical museum exhibits: Designing
personalized stories with handheld Augmented Reality in museums",
Proceedings of the Digital Heritage International Congress, pp. 685688, 2013.
[14] D.A. Kolb, R.E. Boyatzis, C. Mainemelis, "Experiential learning
theory: Previous research and new directions", Perspectives on
thinking, learning, and cognitive styles, 1, pp. 227-247, 2001.
[15] V. Lepetit, L. Vacchetti, D. Thalmann, P. Fua, "Fully automated and
stable registration for augmented reality applications", Proceedings of
the 2nd International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality,
pp. 93, 2003.
[16] R.K. Mohammed-Amin, R.M. Levy, J.E. Boyd, "Mobile augmented
reality for interpretation of archaeological sites", Proceedings of the
2nd International Workshop on Personalized access to cultural
heritage, pp. 11-14, 2012.
[17] S. Robertson, J. Robertson, "Mastering the requirements process:
Getting requirements right", Addison-wesley, 2012.
[18]J. Schroeder, "AndEngine for Android game development cookbook",
Packt Publishing Ltd, 2013.
[19] M.M. Shah, H. Arshad, R. Sulaiman, "Occlusion in augmented
reality", Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Information Science and Digital Content Technology, pp. 372-378,
2012.

[20] U.P. Svensson, "Modelling acoustic spaces for audio virtual reality",
Proceedings of the 1st Benelux Workshop on Model based Processing
and Coding of Audio, pp. 109-116, 2002.
[21] G. Takacs, V. Chandrasekhar, N. Gelfand, Y. Xiong, W.-C. Chen, T.
Bismpigiannis, R. Grzeszczuk, K. Pulli, B. Girod, "Outdoors
augmented reality on mobile phone using loxel-based visual feature
organization", Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on
Multimedia information retrieval, pp. 427-434, 2008.
[22] Y. Tian, Y. Long, D. Xia, H. Yao, J. Zhang, "Handling occlusions in
augmented reality based on 3D reconstruction method,"
Neurocomputing, 156, pp. 96-104, 2015.
[23] V. Vlahakis, N. Ioannidis, J. Karigiannis, M. Tsotros, M. Gounaris, D.
Stricker, T. Gleue, P. Daehne, L. Almeida, "Archeoguide: an

View publication stats

augmented reality guide for archaeological sites", Computer Graphics
and Applications, 22, pp. 52-60, 2002.
[24] D. Wagner, G. Reitmayr, A. Mulloni, T. Drummond, D. Schmalstieg,
"Real-time detection and tracking for augmented reality on mobile
phones", Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 16,
pp. 355-368, 2010.
[25] Y. Xu, N. Stojanovic, L. Stojanovic, A. Cabrera, T. Schuchert, "An
approach for using complex event processing for adaptive augmented
reality in cultural heritage domain: experience report", Proceedings
of the 6th International Conference on Distributed Event-Based
Systems, pp. 139-148, 2012.

