The 9th International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage, VAST (2008)

Personalizing Virtual and Augmented Reality for Cultural
Heritage Indoor and Outdoor Experiences
F. Liarokapis1, S. Sylaiou2, D. Mountain3

2

1
Coventry University, Coventry, UK
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
3
City University, London, UK

Abstract
Most cultural heritage exhibitions, both indoor and outdoor, could benefit from context-aware and personalized
museum guides. Although, technological advancements in digitization, digital storage, visualisation and interaction
have evolved rapidly, the current generation of museum exhibition and mobile guides offer systems with restricted
capabilities and content, for example user selected audio guides and interactive touch screen kiosks. This paper
presents solutions for both museum exhibitions and mobile guides moving towards a unifying framework based on open
standards. This can offer more customisable experiences attracting and engaging a broader spectrum of users. Our
solution takes into account the diverse needs of visitors to heritage and mobile guide exhibitions allowing for
multimedia representations of the same content but using diverse interfaces including a web, a map, a virtual reality
and an augmented reality domain. Different case studies illustrate the majority of the capabilities of the multimodal
interfaces used and also how personalisation and customisation can be performed in both kiosk and mobile guide
exhibitions to meet user needs.
Categories: Virtual and augmented reality, personalized heritage visits, mobile guides, location-aware.

1

Introduction

Museums and other cultural institutions try to
communicate the theme of their exhibitions and attract
the visitors’ attention by presenting audio-visual
information in a number of different ways. As a result,
traditional museum exhibitions have evolved from
passive presentations of artefacts to interactive displays,
such as pre-recorded audio guides and static information
kiosks [VI*02]. However even if some technological
advances have been adopted by current museum and
mobile exhibitions, they provide very simplistic
presentations compared to the potential of the current
Information Technologies. Occasionally, experimental
prototypes have emerged from universities and research
institutions but there is still need to offer support to
cultural heritage exhibitions mainly because the resulted
prototypes are too complex for the visitors and thus can
not meet their needs. It is therefore essential to provide a
unifying framework that can be highly customisable,
user-friendly and intuitive to use in order to engage a
broad spectrum of users and take into account the
diverse needs of museum visitors. The proposed

© The Eurographics Association 2008

framework is focused on open-standards for easy
adaptation of content and presentation across different
media and hardware including desktop and portable
devices.
For indoor exhibitions, some of the most characteristic
technologies will be presented to demonstrate how
multi-modal presentations and interactions of threedimensional heritage environments can provide
enhanced support in practice. Examples from virtual
museum exhibitions are combined with virtual and
augmented reality collections of artefacts through the
use of a web-based interface. Initial user studies
concluded that new technologies like virtual and
augmented reality can be used successfully within
museum environments [LA*03]. They are in effect
empowering tools in the hands of the experts working
towards ensuring that the museums’ goals materialise
successfully not only because of their popularity, but
also because they offer an innovative, appealing and
cost-effective way of presenting cultural information
and provide an enhanced experience to the virtual
visitors. However, it is essential to introduce
personalization in virtual museum exhibitions to provide
the users with a variety of options, offer accessibility for

F. Liarokapis et al / Personalizing Virtual and Augmented Reality for Cultural Heritage Indoor and Outdoor Experiences

people with special needs, like the disabled and elderly,
and permit them to choose according to their
preferences and desires. The information provided shall
not be the same for all. Specific interests and
characteristics of various user groups must be taken into
consideration and allow creating usable, useful and
attractive applications with differentiated access to
information and services according to the visitor profile.
On the other hand, for mobile personalised applications
like on-site visits, a highly customisable mobile
framework illustrates how personalized visits to openair heritage sites can be performed. Navigation within
the open-air locations is based on the calculation of
position and orientation information through global
positioning system (GPS) and digital compass
respectively. Presentation can be delivered in a twodimensional domain (digital map), a three-dimensional
domain (VR map) or an augmented reality domain
(textual information). These tools can provide an
intelligent mobile guide, allowing users to define routes
through sites that best satisfy their information needs,
and take account of their declared interests to ensure
that they do not miss any particular exhibit. Users can
perform advanced searches that take into account spatial
location and personal interest. Users can also act as
generators of content, adding placemarks that can be
shared with other visitors using any of the above
visualization domains. Evaluation as part of the LOCUS
project [Loc*08] indicates that the combination of threedimensional information has a beneficial impact for
users engaged in the tasks of navigation and exploration.
The paper is structured as follows. First, an overview of
the information needs is presented including both
museum user needs and mobile user needs. Moreover,
the challenges for personalisation in museum
environments and heritage institutions as well as an
overview of the most characteristic cultural heritage
exhibitions and mobile guides are provided. After that,
the architecture of the proposed multimodal
customisable framework and each major component
(kiosk environments for museum environments and
mobile guides for outdoor exhibitions) are briefly
explained including the technologies used. Finally, for
each category two case studies including initial
evaluation results and the conclusions drawn from the
undertaken research are illustrated.
2

Information Needs

2.1. What are the current museum user needs?
Current researches have shown that the World Wide
Web enhanced by 3D visualization tools such as the
promising virtual reality (VR) [PC*00] that signifies a
simulated environment created by a computer that a user
can get interact with or manipulate it, Augmented

2

Reality (AR) [Lia07] that signifies computer generated
2D or 3D virtual worlds superimposed on the real world
and Web3D technologies may facilitate the
preservation, dissemination and presentation of cultural
artefacts in museums’ collections [LA*03]. As stated by
MacDonald and Alsford [MA97], “…museums cannot
remain aloof from technological trends if they wish to
attract 21st century audiences”. The availability of these
advanced technologies creates new opportunities for
enhancing the museum experience. Museums explored
these new possibilities and consequently shifted their
interest from the objects of their collections to the users’
needs; they become more user-centred than collectioncentred. In order to create meaningful and engaging
Virtual and Augmented Reality experiences for Cultural
Heritage Indoor and Outdoor applications the museum
user needs for interactivity, accessibility and learning
must be taken into account.
Interactivity has been defined as explorative,
manipulative, and contributive [PP01]. A virtual
museum exhibition tends to be more dynamic and
interactive rather than static in nature and authoritative
[Wor97]. According to research the key features of an
online interactive exhibit are: (a) multiplicity of contexts
for the users to connect with the exhibit in a seamless
manner, (b) good instructional design, (c) pro-active
learning contexts, (d) good balance between learning
and leisure and (e) no text-heavy pages to interfere with
the learning experience [TSA03]. Interactivity enables
participation of the users that are not anymore passive
viewers of static exhibits, but are transformed to
participants of the museum experience by use of
interactive interfaces. Museum visitors use and interact
with the virtual museum environment via a constructive
dialogue that provide them with access to thematic
information and explanations about the museum
objects’ context with the level of information and the
amount of detail they prefer. They shift their focus from
the high-quality presentation of collections to the
making of meaning from the artefacts and their
interpretation. Interactivity can also provide a strong
effect upon conceptual learning that is connected with
the deeper transferable understanding of abstract
knowledge and the logical thinking, the formation of
stories, concepts, associations, perspectives and
strategies [Gam01], [RS05].
Web technologies with their ubiquitous and global
nature can enable access to virtual museum exhibitions
to anyone from almost anywhere beyond national and
cultural barriers. They are used not only because of their
popularity, but also because they provide an enhanced
experience to various user-groups of virtual visitors.
They can provide accessibility to virtual visitors
including elderly people with functional limitations,
people with physical impairments, such as people with
visual, acoustic, learning, speech and motor disabilities
that according to the Disability Discrimination Act

F. Liarokapis et al / Personalizing Virtual and Augmented Reality for Cultural Heritage Indoor and Outdoor Experiences

(DDA) people have equal rights of ‘access to goods,
facilities and services’ [DDA08]. The increased
efficiency of Internet connections makes it possible to
transmit significant media files for content-rich virtual
exhibitions in a multimodal way with user-friendly, high
quality presentations in an innovative appealing and
cost-effective way. By combining the capabilities of
multimedia technologies, web-based systems can
become a powerful communication channel that may be
a virtual ‘direct’ experience. They can disrupt linear
sequences and provide usable and accessible in
technology, content, navigation solutions for all people,
irrespective of their age or abilities. However, there is a
constant need for virtual museums to reach out and
attract larger and more diverse audiences and find ways
to understand visitor expectations and experiences,
address the needs of diverse user groups and be
responsive to various communities’ interests and needs.
Museums can be considered as educational institutions
that contribute to informal learning. Their effectiveness
relies on the ability to convey information in an
engaging way, communicate information about the
museum artefacts context, since Falk and Dierking
[FD00] define learning in terms of how users are able to
comprehend the presented information.
2.2. What are the current mobile user needs?
When considering the information needs of a mobile
device (i.e. users visiting cultural heritage sites) the
information needs of mobile users should be taken into
account. Users of portable mobile devices are quite
distinct from their desktop counterparts [MM07]. Whilst
desktop users tend to work in a familiar, static
environment, mobile users tend to explore dynamic,
often unknown environments. Mobile users are more
likely to be distracted by this external environment, and
to be interacting with it, for example navigating through
it, or finding out information about it. This external
influence places a load on the mobile user, which may
reduce his/ her capacity to assimilate information from
the mobile device. Research has shown that mobile
users have a different pattern of usage when compared
to desktop users [ADN08]. This also offers an
opportunity for mobile computing: the device can
retrieve information relevant to the physical
environment while the user is moving, and provide
assistance to satisfy the information needs.
Whilst desktop usage is characterised by a small number
of long sessions per day (often for hours at a time),
mobile users access their device more times per day, but
each session tends to be just a few minutes in duration.
Mobile devices present constraints in terms of hardware.
They have smaller screens, leaving little room for the
visualizing information. These factors suggest that there
is a need to filter information for mobile users, to reduce
the quantity of information presented, and ensure that
only the most relevant information is presented

3

[MM07]. One approach to filtering information is to
ensure the information is personalised, to take into
account of the preferences of the particular user. An
alternative strategy is to filter information according by
spatial proximity to the user, to make sure that it is
relevant to the device user’s current physical
environment. A study conducted as part of the WebPark
EU project [Mou05] suggests that 50% of mobile
individual’s queries have some spatial component, most
frequently linked implicitly to their current location.
These queries tend to be characterised by people asking
questions such as ‘What is this?’, ‘What is the way
to…?’ and ‘Where do I find…?’.
3

Personalisation

Personalization, an important design element [Mat97],
is the ability of a virtual museum system to alter and
customize its output environment according to the
characteristics of the various user groups. Its importance
is widely recognized by museums [RAS06]. This
process especially useful for web-based applications has
the potential to target various user groups, provide
efficient access to virtual museum information and offer
an experience in line with the different user’s age,
interests, background knowledge (expert, student,
tourist), computer knowledge, educational background
and life-style, motivations, language skills, special
needs, different bandwidth constraints.
The information provided to the user through any of the
above techniques can be adapted at three different
levels: content, navigation and presentation [BN04].
Personalized systems help to recreate the human
element that ‘listens to the visitor’ and ‘understands
him’ by offering a personal touch; the museum
monologue turns into a dialogue [BF04]. In addition to
this, personalization improves the usability of the virtual
museum environment, because it provides to visitors the
ability to interactively choose their preferred style of
navigation, to determine the order of presented
information and an in-depth search by demand. Thus, it
encourages the involvement and allows them to actively
participate to the virtual museum experience,
strengthens the visitor's ability to explore and reduces
the time and effort to find relevant information. Besides
this, it improves the comprehension and facilitates the
critical thinking and the meaning-making. There are two
ways to collect data for personalizing virtual museum
interfaces including explicit and implicit data collection.
In explicit data collection, the virtual visitors can
manually submit information about their preferences
and interests by various ways (e.g. fill-in questionnaires;
ranking). This method provides “high quality” profile
information, but spending time and effort for submitting
data sometimes discourages users [KFM*04]. On the
other hand, in implicit data collection, virtual visitors

F. Liarokapis et al / Personalizing Virtual and Augmented Reality for Cultural Heritage Indoor and Outdoor Experiences

4

preferences are extracted from monitored interactions
with the system (e.g. web usage mining; cookies;
collaborative filtering; visits to links; time spent for
viewing it; image zooming; accessing by search). The
advantage of collecting profile data this way is that the
user is relieved of the burden of having to supply and
keep up-to-date the necessary information. However the
data that come from implicit methods are considered as
of “lower quality" than data extracted from explicit
methods [Nic97]. Implicit measures and explicit ratings
can of course be used in conjunction with one another to
provide a more accurate user profile [KT03].
The most common methods for analyzing the data for
personalizing virtual museum interfaces include: (a)
content-based methods track user behaviour and
preferences, which are based on the common features of
the content a virtual museum user visited and
recommend items with similar characteristics, (b)
collaborative filtering methods [Nic97], [MCS00] that
compares user’s preferences with those of others to
personalise based on the behaviour of other similar
virtual museum users, (c) rule-based filtering methods
that create rules based on static or dynamic profiles to
affect the content provided to a virtual museum user
[MCS00] and (d) web usage mining which is used in
virtual museum websites and uses statistical and datamining methods to the Web server log data, to specify
patterns of users' navigational behaviours [BF04].
4

Multimodal Framework for Heritage Guides

Multimodal interfaces are relatively new types of
communication between users and computing systems.
They cay vary greatly depending on the delivery method
as well as the interaction techniques employed. This
section presents the adaptable architecture, which is
based on common technologies and can be adjusted
according to the application as well as the user needs.
Our personalised heritage solution uses the capabilities
of client-server architectures with two basic elements:
the information server and the client, which are in
essence the two multimodal heritage systems (kiosk or
mobile guide). The information server holds multimedia
objects, such as metadata and textual information,
images and maps, 3D models [Loc*08], [Arc*08].
However, the description of the server side is out of the
scope of this paper and the emphasis has been given in
the multimodal client systems and the way they present
information to users. Figure 1 illustrates the
personalised multimodal framework that provides
customisable solutions for both indoor and outdoor
heritage exhibitions.

Figure 1: Personalised architecture for both kiosk
and mobile heritage exhibitions
Each multimodal system is based on a different software
and hardware infrastructure for presenting customisable
content to users in a compelling and intuitive manner,
but both systems use open standards. The kiosk system
is focused for museums and other heritage exhibitions
that want to give the freedom to their visitors to choose
the information (i.e. galleries, artefacts) they want to
visualise and interact. The mobile guide is designed for
visitors than want to perceive location-aware
information (maps, routes, etc) anywhere and anytime
using accurate position and orientation information. A
brief description of both systems is provided in the next
two sections.
4.1. Kiosk Framework
There are many museums throughout Europe that hold
archives of various-sized artefacts which they cannot
exhibit in an efficient and low cost manner. Multimodal
kiosk interfaces for museum environments and other
indoor exhibitions can be exploited effectively to offer
several different and interesting types of exhibitions
[WP*07]. The main advantage over static kiosk
presentations is that multimodal technologies allow
users select depending on their preferences or needs to
switch between three different types of visualization and
interaction environments. A highly customisable and
adaptable framework for such environments was
derived through some of the results of two EU projects
[Arc*08], [Epo*08]. The aim of the kiosk framework is
to provide customisable solutions for virtual cultural
heritage visualisation and interaction so that it can meet
diverse user needs. An overview of some of the most
characteristic technologies employed in the multimodal
mixed reality kiosk system is presented in Figure 2.

F. Liarokapis et al / Personalizing Virtual and Augmented Reality for Cultural Heritage Indoor and Outdoor Experiences

5

Figure 2: Kiosk framework [WP*07]

Figure 3: Mobile framework

The multimodal kiosk interface allows visitors to select
the best visualization mode for a particular application
scenario. The fundamental idea behind this is based on
the concepts of two previously implemented separate
interfaces: a multimodal interface for safely visualizing
museum artefacts [WP*07] and an interactive
Web3D/AR interface for virtual museums [Lia07]. The
seamlessly integration of these interfaces allows users to
transfer 3D artefacts together with metadata over the
internet and superimpose them on an indoor AR
environment as well as interact with the artefacts in a
number of different ways using several types of
interaction device. Integrating the two systems together
can easily be achieved by treating them as two separate
but communicating interfaces through the use of XML
technologies.

As the user navigates inside the urban environment, the
position and orientation is consciously computed from
external hardware devices such as GPS and digital
compass and the camera pose is updated respectively.
Then depending on the user needs, a map and/or a
virtual reality interface presents two different navigation
options. The mobile guide uses client-server
technologies and it specifically designed for mobile
devices such as PDAs and smartphones. The main
objective of the multimodal system is to provide
location-based services to mobile users delivered
through a web-browser interface (i.e. Pocket Internet
Explorer). In terms of functionality, it offers software
libraries for integrating positional and orientation
information, via Bluetooth, to provide navigational
information about the surrounding environment as well
as 'mobile search' options.

4.2. Mobile Framework
5
The mobile framework uses the capabilities of the
LOCUS system [Loc*08], which was developed on top
of a mobile platform specifically designed to provide
digital guides for tourism [Cam*08]. The novelty of the
system is that it allows users to switch rendering modes
between the traditional digital map guide, a virtual guide
and an augmented guide. This allows mobile visitors to
select the most appropriate presentation type according
to their needs. Additionally, the system provides both
position and orientation tracking in mobile devices
operating anywhere in the word. A high-level
architectural diagram illustrating the major visualisation
domains taking place in the mobile multimodal guide
framework is presented in Figure 3.

Case Studies

5.1. Kiosk Guide
In terms of presentation, the multimodal kiosk offers a
web domain in the traditional way, a web3D domain, a
VR domain and an AR domain. This allows users to
select relevant information and combine it into the same
presentation environment. To test the functionality of
the web-client, two virtual museum exhibitions have
been designed: one for Sussex Past respectively and
another one for Victoria & Albert museum. The web
client is a customised web-browser interface, which
communicates with server visualise the heritage
repository. The retrieved digital content can be rendered
initially on the web browser and then on the AR
tabletop environment.
The VR domain consists of two approaches: one using
pure VR and another using web-based VR. The pure VR
solution can operate as a stand-alone component and
can work within a museum environment in a dedicated
PowerStation. On the other hand the web-based solution
takes advantage of the client-server functionality and

F. Liarokapis et al / Personalizing Virtual and Augmented Reality for Cultural Heritage Indoor and Outdoor Experiences

can access heritage information not only from a
museum environment but from user’s homes. The
differences between the pure VR solution and the webbased solution are in realism, accessibility and
personalisation. The latter can take advantage of the
latest communication technologies (i.e. broadband,
WiFi, etc) and provide a web-based VR presentation
that can be accessed from anywhere and at anytime. In
addition it very easy to customise and personalise the
content of the VR-based presentation since everything is
controlled via server technologies. However, because
the underlying technology used for rendering is VRML,
it lacks of advanced rendering capabilities and thus
realism. On the contrary, the pure VR solution, offers a
much better representation of the virtual artefacts
because it uses computer graphics algorithms for the
generation of soft and hard shadows, reflections and
advanced lighting and texturing techniques [Lia07].

6

entertaining experience offered by the kiosk system.
Qualitatively analysis grouped the evaluators’
comments into the main categories of positive
comments, usability flaw characteristics and
remarks/suggestions [SE*08]. For the usability
evaluation of the system two approaches have been
employed: a questionnaire-based survey and a Cognitive
Walkthrough session by museum curators as domain
experts and usability experts. Cognitive walk-through
methods [Nie94] involve the ‘walk-through’ of a
number of tasks, exploring the systems’ characteristics,
locating and identifying potential problems and their
causes. The research results uncovered the usability
problems of the interface and compared the assessments
of the two different evaluators’ groups concluding that
in complex interfaces double experts (usability and
domain experts) are inevitable for reliable and valid
results [SE*08].
5.2. Mobile Guide
A location-aware mobile cultural guide was
implemented in the Swiss National Park: Switzerland’s
only National Park, and a site of great natural and
cultural importance. Visitors are attracted to the
dramatic, mountainous scenery, the rare flora and fauna,
and the history of human influence on the park. In this
case study, the map was chosen as the primary interface
for the system, and all information stored in the
information database was spatially-referenced, allowing
it to be placed on a map, relative to the device user’s
location.

Figure 4: Kiosk AR presentation [Lia07]
In Figure 4, users can manipulate freely the marker
cards in 3D space to receive a different perception of the
AR exhibition. By using the configuration setting of the
collaboration in the AR interface, visitors can use
HMDs and obtain a completely immersed view. In a
different customisation, users can see more than one
object in the kiosk environment. This can be easily
achieved by just adding another marker into the kiosk
and augmenting another 3D object on it. The
augmentation can be extended to as many markers as
long as the camera can detect them within the optical
field-of-view. It is worth-mentioning, that the realism of
the visualisation highly depends on the 3D modelling
procedure. Also, one of the most important goals of
modern archaeological applications is to present
museum artefacts in a more attractive manner such as in
an AR environment. In this way, museum visitors and
especially small children could become more interested
in cultural heritage.
A combinatory usability evaluation, in which
participated museum curators, as domain specialists and
end-users representing the museum visitors, has been
undertaken to investigate the educational and

Figure 5: Distribution of red deer (darker brown,
more likely to find red deer), relative to user’s
current location (the red cross)
To allow visitors to access general personalised maps,
information was structured according to the activities
that visitors participated in (e.g. hiking), frequently

F. Liarokapis et al / Personalizing Virtual and Augmented Reality for Cultural Heritage Indoor and Outdoor Experiences

asked questions about facilities and access (service /
tips), visitors’ main interests (fauna and flora, habitats)
and other themes, based upon current exhibitions at the
park. By drilling down into these categories and
choosing to display the information on a map, the
visitors could generate a bespoke map based upon their
personal interest and current location, for example, the
locations of the sites of lime kilns in the park, the extent
of the range of red deer, or places where the flower,
edelweiss, is likely to be found.
An evaluation study of the system was conducted with
87 participants in the Swiss National Park. Selected
visitors were provided with a mobile guide on arrival at
the Park information centre, given brief instructions on
its use, and asked to return in the evening and fill in a
questionnaire assessing the usefulness of the mobile
guide [KA04]. The main strength of this method was the
adaptability of the testing scenario since the mobile
guide was used in the field as required, unsupervised
without any intervention from the project team. On the
contrary, the main flaw was that it could not be
guaranteed that all users would utilise all of the system
functionality.
Overall the user reaction to the guide was very positive.
Considering the quality of the information presented by
the device, three-quarters of people rated this as either
‘very good’ or ‘good’. Some two-thirds considered the
ease of information provision to be ‘very good’ or
‘good’. Crucially, the approach of personalising the
information presented to the user by filtering it
according to the user’s position appears to have been a
valued strategy: over 40% of participants considered
this filtered information retrieved to be ‘very relevant’
compared with 12% when the information was
unfiltered. As an example, the ‘search around me’ filter
was provided the most relevant information with two
thirds of the respondents saying that this provided
‘extremely relevant’ results, and over 90% claiming that
results were either ‘extremely relevant’ or ‘relevant’. .
Finally, presenting information over a map appeared to
meet the needs of visitors: 85% of participants found the
maps showing information retrieved following
personalised searches to be ‘beneficial’ or ‘very
beneficial’.
6

Conclusions and Future Work

This work has presented how personalisation of mixed
reality multi-modal interfaces can be used for targeting
the needs of visitors for both kiosk exhibitions and
mobile guides. We showed the importance of a unifying
framework for heritage exhibitions especially if it can
be highly customisable, user-friendly and intuitive to
engage a broad spectrum of users. The proposed
framework is focused on open-standards for easy
adaptation of content and presentation across different
media and hardware including desktop and portable
devices and takes into account the diverse needs of

7

visitors to exhibitions. The multi-modal functionality
allows delivery of a multimedia presentation and
provides different modes of interaction functions
depending on the user needs.
For indoor exhibitions like museum kiosks, a
combination of Web3D, VR and AR provides a very
powerful interface that can be used successfully within
any museum environment. Personalisation of the
presentation: provides museum visitors with a variety of
options; offers accessibility to various groups of people;
permits them to choose according to their preferences
and desires. For outdoor exhibitions, such as mobile
guides, the presentation of map, VR map and AR map
can give assistance to a wide range of users. The use of
position and orientation information is essential for
mobile presentations. Visitors can perform advanced
searches taking into account the spatial location and
personal interest using any of the presentation domains.
Acknowledgments
Part of the work presented in this paper was conducted
within the EU FP5 ARCO project as well as the LOCUS
project, funded by EPSRC, and the EU FP5 WebPark
project. The digital maps used are copyrighted by the
Ordnance Survey/EDINA supplied service.
References
[ADN08] ACCESS DEVELOPER NETWORK.: Available
http://www.accessdevnet.com/,
(last
at:
accessed: 27/07/2008.
[Arc*08] ARCO.: Augmented Representation of
Cultural
Objects.:
Available
at:
http://www.arco-web.org/, Accessed at: 20/07/2008.
[BF04] BOWEN J.P. AND FILIPPINI-FANTONI S.:
Personalization and the Web from a Museum
Perspective, In Museums and the Web 2004: Selected
Papers, Archives & Museum Informatics, David
Bearman and Jennifer Trant (eds.), (2004), 63-78.
[BN04] BRUSILOVSKY P. AND NEJDL W.: Adaptive
Hypermedia and Adaptive Web, In Practical
Handbook of Internet Computing, M. Singh (Ed.),
CRC Press, (2004).
[Cam*08] CAMINEO.: The digital guide for tourism,
Available at: http://www.camineo.com/, Accessed at:
20/07/2008.
[DDA08]
DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION ACT 2005.:
Available
at:
http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/DisabledPeople/, (last
accessed: 27/07/2008.
[Epo*08] EPOCH.: The European Research Network of
Excellence in Open Cultural Heritage, Available at:
http://www.epoch-net.org/, Accessed at: 20/07/2008.
[FD00] FALK J.H.

AND

DIERKING L.D.: The museum

F. Liarokapis et al / Personalizing Virtual and Augmented Reality for Cultural Heritage Indoor and Outdoor Experiences

experience, Walnut Creek, CA: Alta Mira Press,
(2000).
[Gam01] GAMMON B.: Assessing Learning in Museum
Environments: a Practical Guide for Museums
Evaluators, London: Science Museum, (2001).
[KA04] KRUG K. AND ABDERHALDEN W.: Report on
testing and validation, (2004).
[KFM*04] KEENOY K., DE FREITAS S., LEVENE M., ET
AL.: Personalised Trails and Learner Profiling within
E-Learning Environments, Personalised and
Collaborative Trails of Digital and Non-Digital
Learning Objects D22 (4.1), (2004), 1-43.
[KT03] KELLY D. AND TEEVAN J.: Implicit Feedback
for Inferring User Preference: A Bibliography, SIGIR
Forum 37, 2, (2003), 18-28.
[LA*03] LUCRÉDIO D., ALMEIDA E.S., ET AL.: Orion –
A Component Based Software Engineering
Environment, Journal of Object Technology, Special
Issue: TOOLS USA 2003 3, 4, (April 2004), 51-74.
[Lia07] LIAROKAPIS F.: An Augmented Reality
Interface for Visualizing and Interacting with Virtual
Content, Virtual Reality 11, 1, Springer, (March
2007), 23-43.
[Loc*08] LOCUS.: Development of Location-context
Tools for UMTS Mobile Information Services,
Available at: http://www.locus.org.uk/, Accessed at:
20/07/2008.
[MA97] MACDONALD G.F., ALSFORD S.: Towards the
Meta Museum, The Wired Museum: Emerging
technology and changing paradigms, Jones-Garmil
K. (ed.), Washington DC: American Association of
Museums, (1997).
[Mat97] MATEAS M.: An Oz-Centric Review of
Interactive Drama and Believable Agents, Technical
report
CMU-CS-97-156,
Computer
Science
Department, Carnegie Mellon University, (1997).
[MCS00] MOBASHER B., COOLEY R. AND SRIVASTAVA
J.: Automatic Personalization Based on Web Usage
Mining, Communications of the ACM 43, 8, (2000),
42-151.
[MM07] MOUNTAIN D. AND MACFARLANE A.:
Geographic Information Retrieval in a Mobile
Environment: Evaluating the Needs of Mobile
Individuals, Journal of Information Science 33, 5,
SAGE Publications, (October 2007).
[Mou05] MOUNTAIN D.: Exploring mobile trajectories:
An investigation of individual spatial behaviour and
geographic filters for information retrieval, PhD
Thesis, Information Science, City University, (2005).
[Nic97] NICHOLS D.M.: Implicit Ratings and Filtering,
In Proc. of the 5th DELOS Workshop on Filtering

8

and Collaborative Filtering, Hungary, (1997), 31-36.
[Nie94] NIELSEN J.: Heuristic evaluation, In Usability
Inspection Methods, Nielsen, J., and Mack, R.L.
(Eds.), John Wiley & Sons, New York, NY, (1994).
[PC*00] PLETINCKX D., CALLEBAUT D., KILLEBREW
A.E., SILBERMAN N.A.: Virtual-Reality Heritage
Presentation at Ename, IEEE Multimedia 7, 2, IEEE
Computer Society, (April-June 2000), 45-48.
[PP01] PARES N., PARES R.: Interaction-Driven Virtual
Reality Application Design (A Particular Case: El
Ball del Fanalet or Lightpools), PRESENCE:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 10, 2, MIT
Press, (March 2001), 236-245.
[RAS06] RUTLEDGE L., AROYO L. AND STASH N.:
Determining User Interests about Museum
Collections, In Proc. of the 15th Int’l Conference on
World Wide Web, ACM Press, New York, (2006),
855-856.
[RS05] ROUSSOU M. AND SLATER M.: A Virtual
Playground for the Study of the Role of Interactivity
In Virtual Learning Environments, In M. Slater (ed.)
Presence 2005: The 8th Annual Int’l Workshop on
Presence, England, (September 2005), 245-254.
[SE*08] SYLAIOU S., ECONOMOU M., KAROULIS A. AND
WHITE M. The evaluation of ARCO: a lesson in
curatorial competence and intuition with new
technology, Computers in Entertainment 6, 2, article
23, (2008).
[TSA03] TAN WEE HIN L., SUBRAMANIAM R.,
AGGARWAL A.K.: Virtual Science Centers: A New
Genre of Learning in Web-based Promotion of
Science Education, In Proc. of the 36th Annual
Hawaii Int’l Conference on System Sciences, (Jan
2003), 156-166.
[VI*02] VLAHAKIS V., IOANNIDIS N., ET AL.:
Archeoguide: An Augmented Reality Guide for
Archaeological Sites, Computer Graphics and
Applications 22, 5, IEEE Computer Society, (2002),
52-60.
[Wor97] WORDEN S.: Thinking Critically about Virtual
Museums, In Proc. of Museums and the Web,
Archives and Museum Informatics, (1997), 93-109.
[WP*07] WHITE M., PETRIDIS P., LIAROKAPIS F.,
PLECINCKX D.: Multimodal Mixed Reality Interfaces
for Visualizing Digital Heritage. International
Journal of Architectural Computing, Special
Issue on Cultural Heritage 5, 2, Multi-Science
Publishing Co Ltd, (June 2007), 322-337.

