Supporting Access to Museum Information for Mobile Visitors
Carmine Ciavarella, Fabio Paternò
ISTI-CNR
Via G.Moruzzi, 1 – 56100 Pisa - Italy
{c.ciavarella, f.paterno}@cnuce.cnr.it
Abstract
A number of applications can benefit from the use of mobile devices. An example is the museum
application domain where a wide variety of users want to access information regarding the works
of art while freely moving about. In this paper we discuss the possible design choices when
developing interactive mobile applications supporting this type of user and show which have been
adopted in a specific case study and why.

1

Introduction

Nowadays mobile devices have powerful computing capabilities. This opens up new scenarios in
which users can interact with them in many environments. Intelligent devices can be located
anywhere to support users in their daily activities and accompany them in their movements.
The new services enabled by this technological evolution should take into account user
movements and, consequently, the change of the application context of use (see for example,
(Butz, Baus, & Kruger, 2000), and (Cheverst, Davies, Mitchell, Friday & Efstratiou, 2000)). By
context of use, we mean not only the surrounding environment, but also the available interaction
devices and the tasks that the user intends to accomplish. Knowledge of the context of use is
fundamental to designing usable services. In this paper we discuss the design of a location-aware,
context dependent museum application. Most of the solutions adopted can be applied in other
context-dependent in-door applications where the user position cannot be tracked through GPS or
similar technologies.
Several researchers have considered the museum domain. It is characterised by mobile users
without a precise goal and with the need of information dependent on the current context. In our
case we have addressed this problem and then experimented the results in a real museum (the
Marble Museum), which also provides us with the opportunity to receive feedback from real users.
We have developed a new version of an interactive mobile application where in designing how to
provide users with access to the museum information we have also considered the issues related to
the user location. A number of projects have been carried out to address such issues. The aim of
GUIDE (Cheverst, Davies, Mitchell, Friday & Efstratiou, 2000) is to investigate the provision of
context-sensitive mobile multimedia support for city visitors. It is based on the wireless networks,
located in Lancaster: information about positioning is transmitted from strategically positioned
base stations. This system applies out-door technologies that cannot be proposed for in-door
environments like museums.
Museums are an interesting application domain for interactive mobile devices. Museum visitors
can be assisted in various manners. One possibility is the use of audio guides: visitors can use a
vocal output device. They can select the work of interest by entering its code through a numeric
keypad. Audio guides are precursors of electronic guides. They are useful but do not support the
visual channel. Using devices, like PDAs, that support both audio description and images, can
solve this problem. In addition, another issue can be addressed: user orientation. One approach is

suggested by the IrReal project (Butz, Baus, and Kruger, 2000): they have built a navigation
system using infrared transmitters. These transmitters, placed at strategically important points
throughout a building, are useful to provide directions or other localised dynamic information
stored in computers linked to them. This approach is not wholly suitable for museums where
visitors have specific requirements. Also, this solution is expensive and difficult to install because
of the need for a computer for each beacon.
In location-aware systems the information regarding works or sections is selected depending on
the user’s position and length of stay in that position. This information is used to understand what
the user's interests are. This approach has been used for the Hippie system (Oppermann & Specht,
2000) within the HIPS project. The authors have also considered how to effectively present
information to the user while taking into account the user model (interests and preferences of
users). This project also addresses the problem of how to adapt the user interface to the user
model. The model can be modified either directly by the user at the beginning of the session or by
the system's taking into account the history of user interactions and the choices performed by the
user. The suggested information can be accessed through links to the descriptions of the works
that best correspond to the current user model. When accepted the suggestions are used to update
the user model. One potential limitation of this approach is that often the user's position alone is
not enough to indicate interest in the closest work of art; external reasons, such as a crowd
preventing movements, can be the reason for a user's stopping. Thus, the risk is that the system
wrongly identifies the user interests and determines the corresponding user model.
One solution to such limitations of location-aware systems has been proposed for visiting “Filoli”,
a Georgian Revival house (Aoki & Woodruff, 2000). In this case the application provides the
users with an image of the current room with the works of interest highlighted by red borders.
Then, the user can select the object of interest with a pen, which activates an audio comment or a
video. It is possible to change the viewpoint of the room's representation by selecting one of the
device's buttons. In this case, one possible limitation is the use of pictures to represent the room
content duplicating the information that the user is already seeing, with the risk of requiring
multiple interactions to identify the selectable elements of interest. In addition, this solution is
valid only for those museums where the elements of interest are arranged along each wall, while it
becomes difficult to follow in cases where they are spread throughout the room.
In the next section we discuss about the solutions adopted in our case to better support the user
during the museum visit.

2

The Design of the Context-dependent Support

In this section we focus our discussion on how we have chosen to determine the user location, and
how we take into account the context in which the interaction takes place and the techniques used
to support user orientation.

2.1

Location-awareness

The identification of the user position in an in-door environment can be performed at two different
levels of granularity: one is the possibility of identifying the exact position, thus, in the case of a
museum, the system can identify the closest work of art; in the other case the system is able to
identify in which room of the building the user is located. The first case can be useful to try to
identify what works of art are more interesting for the user based on the assumption that the
duration of the time when the user is close to a work of art is proportional to the interest for it.
However, this can be a wrong hypothesis because there may be many reasons why a user stops
somewhere (it could be because of other visitors or some obstacles). Thus, wrong deductions may
negatively influence the application in determining the user interests. This is one of the reasons for
our choice of the second criterion.

In order to determine the user position we have installed infrareds emitters at each ingress to a new
room (see an example in Figure 1). Such emitters have been made ad hoc for our application. They
transmit a unique identifier through IrDA protocol. When the user gets in a new room the emitters
sends the identifier to the PDA, then the application detects it and changes presentation
accordingly.

Figure 1: The Context of Use in the Application.
The angle covered by the infrared emitter is 90°. The signal transmitted by the emitter is
composed of eight characters. Initially we used only three characters, thus the string sent by the
emitters had the following type ‘001@@@@@’. However, after first experiments we realised that
this solution needed to be improved because the infrareds can bounce over surfaces: if the signal
that reaches the infrared port of the PDA do not respect the spectrum of the IrDA protocol then
they can be interpreted wrongly: we can obtain three character strings with wrong content because
the identifier provided is different from that associated to the room where the user is entering.
Thus, we have extended the string transmitted by the emitters by adding three characters that are
used as they were “parity bits”. The algorithm is simple: each number is associated with an
alphabetical character: “0” is associated with “A”, “1” is associated with “B”, etc. Each time a
new string is detected, the application checks that the part of the string composed of numerical
characters corresponds to that composed of alphabetical characters. For example a legal string is
“001AAB@@”. Thus, the application can correctly determine the room where the user is entered.
The emitters are realised by stand-alone technology: they are made in such a way to transmit a
signal (composed of eight characters) per second. They only need the power to work. Thus, our
system is quite easy to install.

2.2

Context-dependency

The application provides information regarding the works of art in the museum taking into
account the user position for this purpose. In the user interface we have introduced elements that
support the access to the information and elements that support the user orientation. When the user
accesses a new section, then the surrounding environment changes. This event is explicitly
highlighted by the application to the user.

Figure 2: Automatic detection of the user position.
When entering in a new section is detected, the application shows where it is located in the
museum map (see for example, Figure 2, left part) and generates a specific sound highlighting the
event in order to attract the user attention. Then, as soon as the screen is touched the section map
is shown (see for example, Figure 2, right part). It indicates the position of the works of art in the
map. Different types of icons are used in order to indicate the types of works located in the room,
in addition to their position. Indeed in the museum several types of works are contained, thus
different icons have been used to represent each of them. An alternative solution would have been
to include the pictures of the works itself. However, the limited resolution of the PDA (240x320)
makes this solution impossible.
To ease user orientation in the museum some specific design choices have been made. The first
one is to orient the section maps on the PDA screen in such a way to reflect the same view as
when the visitor enters physically in them. In addition, some reference points are highlighted in
the map: way in, way out and location of the infrared emitters. In addition to such reference points,
we have introduced some techniques that allow users to navigate in the application and access
information of interest. In particular, the user can access general information regarding the
museum and the thematic sections through specific commands. We have also introduced the
possibility of going back to the last previous presentation accessed through a back button similar
to that provided by Web browsers.
The actual design of our system is the result of the evaluation test that took place in Marble
Museum of Carrara last year. It involved 95 users: they filled a questionnaire, answering questions
about various aspects of the application (Ciavarella & Paternò, 2002).

2.3

Information presentation

We have identified three information levels to support. For each of them the information is
provided in a specific manner:
• Museum level, this is the most general level, overall information is provided, including its
history.

•

•

Section/subsection level, information specific to the current section is provided. Such
information can be useful to prepare the user regarding what can be found in the current
section/subsection in order to better decide whether or not to visit it and how long. The
biggest sections have been divided into subsections in order to provide a more refined
description of their content.
Work level, at this level the specific information regarding a work of art is provided,
including those regarding the author, when available, the production year and the
material. The next figure is an example of an artwork presentation.

In presenting the information the multimedia features of the PDA have been exploited: colour
screen, audio file, videos allows the application to provide multimedia information implemented
in standard formats without loosing resolution and saving memory space. The audio presentations
(in Italian and English) are pre-recorded MP3 audio files. Each work is presented through a
140x140 Jpeg picture and a number of MPEG videos provide information related to the content of
the museum but not visible in the museum (for example, historical videos or videos showing how
marble quarrying is currently performed).

3

Conclusions

The increasing availability of mobile devices with powerful capabilities enables new use scenarios
characterised by moving users needing access to information relevant to what he can currently
observe. The museum field is characterised by visitors who freely move needing contextdependent information without a precisely defined goal. Thus, there is a need for contextdependent information, which should be provided without disorienting the user.
We have presented a work where an interactive system has been designed in order to support
mobile visitors while accessing museum information. It exploits the multimedia capabilities of the
PDA platform available (Ipaq Compaq with 1 Gigabyte flash memory) and uses specific infrared
emitters to identify the room where the user is located. Thus, we have obtained a low-cost and
easy to install solution that can be adopted in other similar applications. It has recently been made
available for all the Marble Museum visitors. We plan to gather user feedback through a new
round of questionnaires and interviews.

4

References

Aoki, P. M., & Woodruff, A. (2000), Improving Electronic Guidebook Interfaces Using a TaskOriented Design Approach, 3rd Conf. on Designing Interactive Systems, Aug. 2000, pp. 319-325,
ACM Press.
Butz, A., Baus, J., & Kruger , A., (2000), Augmenting buildings with infrared information. In
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Augmented Reality ISAR 2000 pages 93-96.
IEEE Computer Society Press.
Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Mitchell, K., Friday A. & Efstratiou , C., (2000), Developing a Contextaware Electronic Tourist Guide: Some Issues and Experiences, Proceedings of CHI 2000,
Netherlands, April 2000, pp 17-24, ACM Press.
Ciavarella C., & Paternò, F., (2002), Design of Handheld Interactive Support, in Pre-Proceedings
of the DSV-IS ’02, Rostock, Germany
Oppermann, R. & Specht, M., (2000), A Context-Sensitive Nomadic Exhibition Guide,
Proceedings Symposium on Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing, pp.127-142, LNCS 1927,
Springer Verlag.

