Supporting Small Groups in the Museum
by Context-Aware Communication Services
Tsvi Kuflik, Julia Sheidin, Sadek Jbara,
Dina Goren-Bar, Pnina Soffer
The University of Haifa
Mount Carmel, Haifa, Israel
{tsvikak,jsheidin,sjbara,dgb,spnina}@is.haifa.ac.il
ABSTRACT

two such services, specifically targeted for sharing the
museum experience, namely intra-group communication
and system-visitors communication.

Visitors often tend to visit museums in groups, mainly with
family or friends, yet most of the today mobile museum
guides focus on supporting the individual visitor. The
technology described in this paper allows supporting groups
of visitors in addition to individuals by providing contextaware services aimed at supporting the whole group. These
include context-aware communication and alerting services
that are provided by the museum visitor’s guide system
developed in the framework of the PIL (PEACH-Israel)
project, as an example case of a larger variety of possible
context-aware services.

MUSEUM VISITORS’ GUIDES APPLICATIONS

Museum visitors’ guides have evolved from providing
information about the exhibits on demand to personalized,
location aware systems that at best are able to provide a
coherent presentation during the visit (see for instance [8]).
The next step is to take into account the small group (e.g. a
family or a group of friends) that the visitor may be part of,
and facilitate interaction among members to stimulate
further interest.
What we discuss in this paper is an initial step toward the
ambitious goal of having technology stimulating
conversation about the museum contents within the group,
during and after the visit. In fact, according to [6]
conversation is a key factor for enhancing learning and the
quality of the museum experience in general. Specifically
regarding communication services, it is worth mentioning
that some experimental museum visitor’s guide systems
were extended to also provide means of communication
among visitors. One example is the “Guide” project,
developed in the city of Lancaster, UK, that provided an
electronic handheld guide enabling visitors to Lancaster to
access information about the city, to create tailored tours of
the city, to access interactive services, to send and receive
messages to/from their companions, to let other members of
their group know their location and to leave virtual stickon notes at specific locations in the city so they can share
their experiences with other tourists [1]. Another example
is the “guidebook” in the Exploratorium in San Francisco.
The guidebook prototype combined the functions of
informing, suggesting and remembering. The researchers
concluded that their remembering service may have value
for personal and social uses. They also concluded that
people seem to enjoy helping each other and discussing the
exhibits, and this seemed to encourage additional
interaction with the exhibits [3].
It seems that the above examples combined some means of
communication as part of the application, assuming and
concluding that this may improve the visit experience.

ACM Classification: H5.2 Interaction styles, Screen design.
General terms: Design, Human Factors
Keywords: Context-Aware Communication
Multimedia Museum Visitor’s Guide.

Oliviero Stock, Massimo Zancanaro
ITC/irst
Via Sommarive 18, Povo, Trento, Italy
{stock,zancana}@itc.it

services,

INTRODUCTION

Many visitors tend to visit museums in small groups,
mainly with family or friends [9]. The learning experience
that takes place in museums nowadays is free-choice. It
tends to be personal; it is self-motivated, self-paced, and
exploratory by nature. The visitor chooses what, where and
when to learn [2]. In this context, interaction among visitors
may increase learning in the museum environment [2]. New
tools for communication may increase interaction and
hence contribute to the visit experience. Various museum
visitors
guide
applications
provide
means
of
communication among visitors [4], but without an
underlying systematic approach. This work proposes a
framework for context-aware communication services
integrated with the presentation capabilities. The paper
presents a museum visitors’ guide system augmented with
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
IUI’07, January 28–31, 2007, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA.
Copyright 2007 ACM 1-59593-481-2/07/0001...$5.00.

305

by the system using the sender’s and receiver’s states (e.g.
if the receiver has already been to the place, the system
notifies the sender about that). A visitor may leave a virtual
“post-it” to a colleague at a certain point, and the system
will notify the visitor in case his/her partner already visited
that place. The visitor may also send a message suggesting
meeting at the cafeteria (or taking a break, scheduling the
visit, etc.).

A different example is the InfoRadar project. It provided a
novel radar interface for accessing messages, desktop-like
temporal storage for messages, location-independent
message threading, filtering functionality, contextual
audience addressing, multimedia messaging, social activity
indicator, and voting. InfoRadar attempted to combine both
public and in-group messaging into one system [7]. The
researchers concluded that such services have an enormous
contribution to the visitor’s experience while touring.
The unique aspects of our work are that a) communication
with members of the group is integrated with presentations
while the focus is mainly kept on the exhibit and the system
presentations; b) the communication is context-aware,
taking into account at least some information about
positions, models and state of other members of the group.
THE PIL MUSEUM VISITOR’S GUIDE SYSTEM

The PIL museum visitors guide is a first step to extend the
research results of the PEACH project (http://peach.itc.it.)
from the individual to the group level. A museum visitors’
guide system has been developed (using PEACH
technology) for demonstrating and experimenting intergroup communication and overall group visit support.

Figure 1: PIL museum visitors guide architecture.

Figure 1 presents the core parts of our museum visitor’s
guide multi-agent system. Several components interact by
exchanging messages through channels; this kind of
architecture is very effective to experiment with flexible
system (for detailed description of the underlying
technology see [5]). The system contains a user-modeling
component that keeps track of visitor’s preferences based
on their behavior (and also keeps track of the history of
events each visitor was involved in), a spatial information
broker reports visitor’s position periodically, integrating
positioning information from different sources (currently IR
and in the near future also WiFi), a presentation composer
provides presentations to the visitor, based on current
location and taking into account visitor’s inferred
preferences. The novel addition is the services agent that
provides communication and alerting services for both
individuals and groups. This component keeps track of the
state of the individual visitors and abstracts the information
to an overall group state.

Anther set of services is time based alerting. Usually,
visitors have a limited period of time for their visit. We are
experimenting with services that help visitors get the most
from their time by exploiting the group dimension.
We consider that people generally do not want to miss the
most important exhibits (there is nothing that can take the
place of being in front of the real object). But if time is
limited, presentations, up to a point can be complementary,
and people can integrate what has been presented to them
by talking to the other members of the group later.
One case is when the system acts differently at the last
phase of the visit. It sends a message to visitors suggesting
them to see the “must see” exhibits. In this case the system
takes an overall look of the group, making sure that
individuals in the group visit all important exhibits and get
a variety of relevant presentations, so they have
complementary information to be possibly discussed and
shared later after the visit. In this situation the user model
that influences the material proposed by the system to the
individual in the general modality, is less important in this
phase, because the state of the group prevails.

Regarding communication services, the initiator of
messages may be the individual visitor or the system.
Messages can be addressed to a specific visitor, to a group
or to everybody. Messages can be delivered immediately or
when certain conditions are satisfied. A general contextaware
communication
service
should
support
communication with various addressees, based on
contextual conditions (and as a result, offering a variety of
services). For initial demonstration of the above, the
services include context-aware immediate message (SMSlike) and context-aware virtual “post-it”. The messages are
sent either among visitors or by the system to the visitors. A
visitor may send a “come here” or “you must see this”
message to a partner; the message is being contextualized

The PIL context-aware, personalized menu-driven user
interface was developed applying user-centered design.
Context-aware communication services were integrated
into the system in a way that they do not interfere with
normal use of the guide. This means for instance that
communication activities are available to the visitor only
when no multimedia presentation is being played (e.g. only
when moving around/approaching an exhibit or between
presentations in a certain position).

306

name of the exhibit and by attaching the relevant picture
(Fig. 4). It may happen that the addressee has already been
at that location; in this case the system will notify the
sender about that.

Let us use the following scenario for illustrating the overall
system and the integration of the new features into a mobile
museum visitors’ guide. The scenario envisioned relates to
a small group of visitors (three – four friends or a family)
that visits the exhibitions and listens to presentations, each
visitor at his/her own pace. The system identifies the
visitor’s location and accordingly provides her/him with the
relevant position illustration. The visitor chooses an exhibit
and accordingly the system provides her/him the relevant
menu (the order of the menu items is personalized). The
visitor selects and views a presentation (Fig. 2, left to
right).

Figure 4: Sending and reading a message.

When the system enters into the “little time available”
modality, there is a high priority to see the “crucial exhibits
for a visitor” at the museum. In this scenario the system
also addresses a social context. It sends “don’t miss
messages” to the visitors. Different messages are sent to
different visitors regarding the nearest “must see exhibit”,
that seems to be of interest to him/her, that he/she has not
seen yet. When the visitor approaches the “must see
exhibit”, the presentations recommended by the system for
that exhibit are those that seem of interest but not yet
presented to any other group member, instead of being
those recommended only according to her/his specific user
model.

Figure 2: Museum visit guide interface.

During the visit, the visitors are possibly moving on
different paths, and may communicate with other members
of their group. They can send predefined messages about
some exhibits they find especially impressing, or leave
post-its on some exhibit that they would like the others to
eventually see (see Fig. 3 on the left, message creating
icons).

PRELIMINARY AND PLANNED EVALUATION

As already mentioned, the system’s user interface was
developed applying user-centered design. Thus, several
rounds of formative evaluation were performed to provide
feedback to the development team. We have also checked
in pilot studies that users understand, interact and like the
current user interface.
The experimental evaluation (that is currently at an initial
phase) focuses on various aspects of the system (including
individual oriented aspects: interface usability, comparing
adaptive and non adaptive interfaces; contribution of the
multimedia presentations to individual learning). Specific
evaluation is going to take place for the contribution of the
communicational activities to the overall visit experience.
We expect that the integration of the presentation and the
communication capabilities will make the interface easy to
use and especially that the social interaction between
members during the museum visit will enhance and deepen
the visitors’ interest in the exhibits.

Figure 3: Selectable communication services.

Once the visitor gets a message, a relevant button becomes
enabled (see Fig. 3 on the right, message reading icons).
Sending and reading a message is an example of contextawareness. Let us assume that the content of a message
was: “Come here”. The system uses the contextual position
information for translating it by giving the exact name of
the exhibit and attaching the relevant picture.
Another example is leaving a post it message with the
content: “You must see this exhibit”. The system uses the
contextual information for interpreting it by giving the

CURRENT WORK

The context-aware communication services provide initial
means of intra-group interaction. To further encourage the

307

group interaction and let the whole group members share
their experience, we are currently developing visualization
support for a post visit group discussion. Sitting for
instance in the cafeteria, during or after the visit, visitors
will be able to become aware of the parts of the museum
visited by other group members, of places that have been of
special interest to a member (with images of the relevant
exhibits) as reflected by messages sent, and by personal
notes for remembering points that were of particular
interest.

services (getting directions to specific places, group
members relative positions) and more.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

PIL was developed as part of the collaboration between
ITC/irst and the University of Haifa and experimentation is
conducted at the Hecht museum at the University of Haifa.
REFERENCES

1. Davies N. Cheverst K. Mitchell K. Efrat A. Using
and determining location in a context-sensitive tour
guide. Computer 34, 8, (Aug. 2001), pp. 35- 41.

This part requires appealing graphics and good quality
images of the relevant exhibits and will be provided on a
good-quality large display.

2. Falk, H. J. and Dierking, L. D. Learning from Museums:
Visitor Experience and the Making of Meaning.
Rowman & Littlefield, New-York.Klemmer, 2000.

Interactive functionalities will include re playing (now to
all group members at the same time) presentation that has
been seen in connection to a given exhibit, and access to
external information.

3. Fleck M., Frid M., Kindberg T., O’Brien-Strain E.,
Rajani R. and Spasojevic M. From Informing to
Remembering: Ubiquitous Systems in Interactive
Museums, Pervasive computing, 1, 2, (April – June,
2002), pp. 13-21.

We expect the visual context of the key points of the group
visits per se will be a favorable background for discussing
the exhibits and presentations seen by the group members.
A novel round of experiments will be set to evaluate the
overall setting.

4. Grinter, R. E., Aoki, P. M., Hurst, A., Szymanski,
M. H., Thornton, J. D. and Woodruff, A.. Revisiting the
visit: Understanding how technology can shape the
museum visit. In Proceedings of ACM Conference on
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, New Orleans,
Louisiana, USA, (2002) pp. 146 – 155.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

The communication services implemented are only a small
part of possible communication services. For the moment
we decided not to enter free text or speech, to avoid
problems of usability in a museum, but additional
communication services may include writing memories
(personal or to be shared), taking notes, pictures, and more.
Such services can be generalized to a set of general
communication services, where all may have in common a
sender, an addressee, a set of contextual conditions for
delivery and content to be sent. In fact, context-awareness
may be an attribute common to other services, as
demonstrated also by the alerting service, that can be
regarded as a composition of time service (alarm clock)
with the communication service (when time trigger fires, a
message is sent by the system). Of course, this latter simple
service can potentially be integrated with a more
sophisticated personal or group oriented advice. In the next
step we plan a generic context-aware information broker
that will provide the required contextual information to
different services. Such services will include, besides the
communication services and time-based alerting services,
additional alerting services (such as helping the visitors
plan the visit and avoid crowded places), navigation

5. Kuflik, T., Albertini, A., Busetta, P., Rocchi, C., Stock,
O. and Zancanaro M. An Agent-Based Architecture for
Museum Visitor’s Guide Systems - IFITT’s Global
Travel & Tourism Technology and eBusiness Forum
(ENTER 2006), January 2006, Lausanne, CH.
6. Leinhardt G. and Knutson K., Listening In On Museum
Conversations. Altamira Press Walnut Creek, CA. USA,
2004.
7. Rantanen M., Oulasvirta A., Blom J., Tiitta S., Mäntylä
M. InfoRadar: Group and Public Messaging in the
Mobile Context. In Proceedings of NordiCHI 2004,
Tampere, Finland, ACM Press (2004), pp. 131-140.
8. Stock, O.and Zancanaro M. (eds.) PEACH: Intelligent
Interfaces for Museum Visits. Cognitive Technologies
Series, Springer, Berlin, in press
9. Woodruff A., Aoki P. M., Hurst A. and Szymanski M.
H. The Guidebook, the Friend, and the Room: Visitor
Experience in a Historic House. In: Human Factors in
Computing Systems: Proceedings of the CHI’01
Conference, Seattle, Washington, (2001) pp. 273 – 274.

308

