The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/1757-9880.htm

JHTT
2,2

The indicators of intention
to adopt mobile electronic
tourist guides

120

Rita Peres

Received 11 June 2010
Revised 12 December 2010
Accepted 26 February 2011

Estoril Higher Institute for Hotel and Tourism Studies, Estoril, Portugal

Antónia Correia
Faculty of Economics, University of Algarve, Faro, Portugal, and

Miguel Moital
School of Services Management, Bournemouth University, Bournemouth, UK
Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to understand tourists’ acceptance of innovative information
technologies by examining the factors influencing the intention to use mobile electronic tourist guides
(METG).
Design/methodology/approach – This paper developed and tested a model for examining tourists’
acceptance of METG based upon Davis’ technology acceptance model (TAM). The model considered
three antecedents of intention: knowledge, usefulness and attitude. The relationships between them
and between these and intention were explored using structural equation modeling.
Findings – The findings revealed that tourists’ behavioural intentions towards using METG could
be raised through attitude by ensuring greater levels of perceived usefulness. Usefulness, in turn, is
highly influenced by the tourists’ level of knowledge regarding METG. In addition, there was also a
direct significant path between knowledge and behavioural intention, suggesting that good levels of
knowledge of the technology are a pre-condition for greater usage of METG.
Research limitations/implications – This paper suggests that the predictive ability of the TAM
in the context of innovations at their early stages of diffusion, that is, when potential adopters know
little about them, can be enhanced by incorporating knowledge as an explanatory variable. Future
studies could use the full version of the TAM by including other measures of knowledge beyond
awareness knowledge, such as how-to knowledge, as suggested by Rogers.
Originality/value – This paper adapts the TAM to study the acceptance of technology-based
information technologies at their early stages of development. The findings of this study contribute to
enhancing our understanding of what influences tourists’ acceptance of METG. They can be used to
inform local and national strategies aimed at developing Portugal’s (and other countries’) credentials
as digital destinations.
Keywords Mobile technology, Tourism, Portugal, Tourists, Guides and handbooks
Paper type Research paper

Journal of Hospitality and Tourism
Technology
Vol. 2 No. 2, 2011
pp. 120-138
q Emerald Group Publishing Limited
1757-9880
DOI 10.1108/17579881111154236

1. Introduction
Traditionally, tourist destinations try to differentiate themselves from competitors in
many ways, such as through good accessibility and high-quality accommodation.
Recently, however, more emphasis has been placed on the range of services provided
This paper was based on a research sponsored by the Scholarship Program of the
Turismo de Portugal, IP.

to ever more demanding consumers. According to Goeldner and Ritchie (2003), services
and attractions should be presented in a creative and intelligent way. The fast
evolution of information and communication technologies has led to the development
of new ways of gathering, using and transmitting information in real time. Therefore,
destinations should capitalise on this trend and make the most of the opportunities
provided by the development of mobile and interactive technologies.
From the multiple mobile technologies available in the market, mobile electronic
tourist guides (METG), while still an emerging technology, have been regarded as one
of the most promising ones. Using the personal digital assistant as technological
platform, METG provide important potential benefits for tourists that differentiate the
system from traditional tourist information systems. The high levels of mobility and
access to interactive information in real time are perhaps the greatest benefits of
METG. Consequently, the tourist is better equipped to maximise the time spent in the
destination. This is achieved by avoiding travelling to the tourist office every time new
information is required, by not having to wait for the information and, above all,
through accessing information anywhere and anytime. By saving time on looking
around for information, tourists could engage in more activities while at the
destination, potentially increasing their spending. Perhaps more importantly, using
METG could provide more quantity and variety of information, making tourists better
informed about what is on offer, potentially resulting in better consumption decisions
and consequently more satisfied consumers. This, in turn, will result in greater loyalty
to the destination (Yoon and Uysal, 2005; Yuksel and Yuksel, 2002). In addition, greater
usage of METG by tourists would facilitate monitoring the tourist experience as it
would be relatively easy to set up the technology to monitor what, when, where and
how consumers search for information. This information could inform strategic
planning at the destination level. Nishimura et al. (2007) pointed out that destination
authorities had little direct control over several of the most sought after sources of
travel information. METG could also help destinations to have a more directly
influence on the information made available to tourists. Therefore, the potential
benefits for both the tourist and the destination are high.
Past research has shown that many tourists, including those who have never used
them, view the use of mobile technologies in a tourism context, including METG,
positively (Cheverst et al., 2000; Schmidt-Belz et al., 2003; Lee and Mills, 2007).
However, the technology is still in its infancy and only a small proportion of tourists
use it. While there are many reasons for the low level of usage by consumers, including
supply ones, consumer acceptance will be the ultimate influencing factor. Research in
the area of tourists’ acceptance of METG is still scarce, despite some noteworthy recent
contributions. Given that the development of a consumer-focused mobile tourist
information strategy requires an understanding of consumers’ acceptance of this
innovative technology, this paper examines the factors influencing the intention to use
METG.
2. Literature review
The acceptance and use of information technologies has been the focus of many studies
aiming at understanding the determinants of their acceptance by consumers.
Most studies have been developed against three theoretical frameworks: the theory of
reasoned action (TRA) (Fishbein and Azjen, 1975), the technology acceptance model

Mobile electronic
tourist guides

121

JHTT
2,2

122

(TAM) (Davis, 1989) and the diffusion and adoption of innovations (Rogers, 1995).
These are reviewed in the next three sections.
2.1 The theory of reasoned action
The TRA postulates that a person’s behaviour is determined by intention to perform
the behaviour. Intention is, thus, seen as the best predictor of behaviour. This intention
is, in turn, a function of two basic determinants. The first determinant is an
individual’s attitude toward the behaviour. Attitude is the person’s general feeling of
favourableness or unfavourableness towards that behaviour and is formed based on
the person’s salient beliefs that the behaviour leads to certain outcomes and the
evaluation of those outcomes. In other words, whether the outcome of his/her
behaviour will be positive or negative. The second determinant is subjective norm and
is related to the influence of the social environment on intentions and behaviour.
More specifically, it refers to the opinions of the person’s social environment about
him/her performing the behaviour. The subjective norm is a consequence of the beliefs
that specific referents think about whether the individual should, or should not,
perform the behaviour, as well as the motivation to comply with these referents.
The relative importance of attitudinal and normative components will vary according
to the intention under consideration and from one person to another (Ajzen and
Fishbein, 1980). However, research suggests that most behaviour is controlled mainly
by attitude than by social influence (Cooper and Donald, 2001).
2.2 The technology acceptance model
The TAM was first introduced by Davis (1989) and Davis et al. (1989) for predicting user
acceptance of information systems. Theoretically developed upon Fishbein and Ajzen’s
TRA, the model aims to be a parsimonious and valid theoretical template with which to
study the adoption a broad range of end-user computing technologies (Davis et al., 1989).
Similar to TRA, in the TAM usage is determined by behavioural intention. In essence,
the model posits that two variables fundamentally determine user acceptance of the
technology: perceived usefulness and ease of use. The first TAM posited that the two
beliefs about using the innovation (ease of use and usefulness) impacted on intention
through attitude. Perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use instruments have
received substantial attention by researchers both empirically and theoretically
(Adams et al., 1992; Chin and Gopal, 1995; Hendrickson et al., 1993; Igbaria et al., 1995;
Mathieson, 1991; Segars and Grover, 1998; Straub et al., 1995; Subramanian, 1994).
Adams et al. (1992) replicated Davis’s work in field studies on the usage of several
information technology applications. Hendrickson et al. (1993) examined the test-retest
reliability and database software applications. Nevertheless, the determinants of ease of
use and usefulness are far from being consensual. In fact several authors found that the
ease of use comprised a set of determinants that differ in context.
Agarwal and Prasad (1997) focused on individual’s perceptions about the
characteristics of the target technology as explanatory and predictive variables for
acceptance behaviour, and presented an empirical study examining the effects of these
perceptions on two outcomes (initial use and future use intentions) in the context of
innovation represented by the world wide web. Furthermore, the authors concluded
that voluntariness and external pressures have an impact on the acceptance behaviour.
Also, Atkinson and Kydd (1997) examined the influence of the individual characteristic

of playfulness, ability to use the computer, ease of use and usefulness on the use of the
world wide web. They found that all the considered constructs affect world wide web
use. Later, Fenech (1998) tested Davis’ TAM constructs of perceived usefulness and
perceived ease of use as predictors of user acceptance of world wide web. The results
indicated a poor fit for Davis’ (1986) TAM until the inclusion of an additional construct,
the computer self-efficacy (Compeau and Higgins, 1995; Igbaria and Iivari, 1995; Yi and
Venkatesh, 1996). In line with previous research Venkatesh and Davis (1996) prove that
self-efficacy and objective usability are determinants of perceived ease of use. Later,
Venkatesh and Davis (2000) developed and tested a theoretical extension of TAM,
referred to as TAM2. TAM2 explains perceived usefulness and usage intentions in
terms of social influence (subjective norm, voluntariness and image) and cognitive
instrumental (job relevance, output quality and result demonstrability) processes.
The research about how to measure perceived ease of use keeps is also the subject of
study of Venkatesh (2000) who found that an individual’s general beliefs regarding
computers were the strongest determinants of system-specific ease of use, even after
direct experience with the target system. Mozeith et al. (2009) results of the adoption of
restaurant-based e-services indicate that perceived ease of use is markedly higher for
mobile handhelds and that perceived usefulness was more important with traditional
lap/desk devices because it addresses more extrinsic aspects of task orientation such as
task efficiency and effectiveness. According to this author, several researchers have
accommodated this change (Liaw, 2002; Luarn and Lin, 2005) whereas others still refer
to the original model (Ho et al., 2003; Chen and Tan, 2004).
The TAM has many strengths that make it potentially suitable for the adoption of
technological innovations. It is a reliable and robust model, with empirical data
extensively supporting and validating the theory (Agarwal and Prasad, 1999; Chen et al.,
2002; Vijayasarathy, 2004). Moreover, it possesses the theoretical property of parsimony
(Agarwal and Prasad, 1999; Mathieson et al., 2001) and is focused on technology-based
behaviours (Mathieson et al., 2001). Sandhu and Corbitt (2002), cited by Mozeith et al.
(2009) put forward the e-service adoption model, which is an adaptation of Davis’s TAM
and the results demonstrate that consumers react and adjust to emerging e-services
by means of experience, motivation, frequency of use and investment.
In general, it could be assumed that TAM differs from TRA in two aspects. First,
TAM introduced two new constructs, perceived usefulness (the belief that using an
application will increase one’s performance) and perceived ease of use (the belief that
one’s use of an application will be free of effort). Since its introduction by Davis,
TAM has been widely used for predicting the acceptance, adoption and use of
information technologies.
2.3 The adoption of innovations model
The adoption of innovations model was put forward by Rogers in the 1960s (Rogers,
1995). Adoption refers to the cognitive process associated with the decision to make use
or reject an innovation. Like several other theories of consumer behaviour, the adoption
theory posits that individuals go through several stages before use of the innovation
takes place. In other words, consumers engage in a series of actions and decisions
over time aimed at evaluating the new idea, before deciding whether or not to
incorporate the innovation into ongoing practice (Rogers, 1995). While the decision
process has changed over the years, in its current form the process comprises

Mobile electronic
tourist guides

123

JHTT
2,2

124

five stages (Rogers, 1995): knowledge, persuasion, decision, implementation and
confirmation. One major difference between the TRA/TAM and the adoption of
innovations model is that the latter explicitly recognises that knowledge is an essential
component of the process, while the former assumes that the individual has developed
some type of knowledge regarding the innovation.
2.4 Information search in tourism
In order to define and understand the different types of behaviours associated with
information search, search has been conceptualised in many ways, including
internal/external (Gitelson and Crompton, 1993; Fodness and Murray, 1999),
static/dynamic (Sheldon, 1997), decisive/contributive (Vogt and Fesenmaier, 1998),
formal/informal (Mathieson and Wall, 1982) and personal/interpersonal (Hsieh and
O’Leary, 1993).
Flognfeldt and Nordgren (1999) further suggested a temporal classification of
search, according to the sequence of the travel consumption process: before, during and
after visiting the destination. According to Mansfeld (1992) and Sheldon (1997),
information search and use tends to be more intense before arrival at the destination
than during the travelling period. At this stage, tourists decide upon whether to travel
to the destination and make preliminary decisions regarding what to do once there.
The assumption that most information search activity tends to take place before
arrival has led to an emphasis of research on the pre-travelling stage (Snepenger et al.,
1990; Fodness and Murray, 1999; Gursoy and Chen, 2000; Gursoy and Umbreit, 2004).
However, there is a growing recognition of the role of information search during travel.
In a recent study, Nishimura et al. (2007) suggested that for independent travellers
information search tends to be an ongoing task, with tourists externally searching for
information actively. According to Mintel (2006), “this is the age of the independent
traveller”. In the UK, in 2006 independent travel accounted for 58 per cent of the
outbound (representing a 49 per cent growth since 2001) and generating £13.5 billion.
The reasons that have fuelled this growth – sharp growth of budget airlines, access to
the internet and the rise of the e-tourist – indicate a further positive outlook for this
market. Therefore, destinations need to place more emphasis on satisfying the
information needs of this valuable travel segment.
Many decisions regarding what to do may have been taken before arriving at the
destination. However, tourists are likely to seek reinforcement of many of those
decisions once there. In this case, their search may be one of fine-tuning previous
consumption decisions (e.g. when to do it, what is the best way to get there). However,
in many cases the decision of what to do is left until arrival. Thus, the purchasing
process for many of the consumption decisions is likely to take place only after the
tourists’ arrival. For example, tourists may not be aware of certain attractions, local
restaurants or entertainment activities prior to travelling. In such cases, the purchasing
process may be triggered by advertising in local tourist guides, discussion with fellow
tourists or recommendations from locals (e.g. receptionists). Recognising the
importance of information search at the destination, tourist authorities have set up
structures to facilitate tourists’ access to information. One such example is the tourist
office. Here, tourists can find both literature and expert advice on many aspects of the
tourist experience offered by the destination.

According with Watson et al. (2004), there are three phases in which tourists could
benefit from information systems: planning, touring and reminiscing. In the planning
phase, prior to the trip, the tourist collects information about destinations. In recent
years, the web has significantly increased the traditional sources of tourist guides and
travel services. Touring, the second phase of tourism, defines the period when a person
is visiting sites, wandering around museums, attending a festival and so forth. During
this phase, the tourists need location-based information services to inform them about
the tourist attractions within their environments. The authors refer that the tourists
might, for example, seek information about objects within their immediate vicinity
(e.g. what is the history of the memorial on the corner?) or find out what is available
(e.g. what is the nearest open museum?). Tourists might also seek information about
services in areas they are approaching (e.g. what hotels in the next town have
vacancies?, what are their relative locations?, what are their rates?). On returning from
a trip, travellers recall the highlights and often share these with relatives and friends.
Also, they might want to comment on places they have visited. Hence, there is a need to
support the creation of a personal electronic trip album so that the traveller can relive
and share memories, and potentially increase tourism through this electronic variation
of word of mouth.
Most of the studies on travellers’ choice of information search strategies have focused
on the sources and channels used while at home planning the trip. As DiPietro et al.
(2007) point out, only limited systematic efforts have been made to understand how
visitors search for information at the destination. Rompf et al. (2005) also point out that
at-destination information search activity remains a significantly under-researched
phenomenon and that savvy tourism marketers need to realise the potential of
understanding this phenomenon. Rompf et al. (2005) have emphasised the importance of
locals as a source of tourist information while at the destination. DiPietro et al. (2007)
found friends and relatives as well as hotel staff to be the most important information
source for at-destination decisions. Local residents and visitor centre staff seemed to be
important in providing information about entertainment, recreation and dining.
Nishimura et al. (2006) identified word of mouth from family and friends as a major
pre-trip source, while tour guides and local residents were the most useful information
sources during travel. Word of mouth from other tourists was seen as a typical “during
travel” source. Destination information services further disseminate and distribute
information through other elements in the tourism system, such as hotels and attractions.
Following developments in mobile technologies, destinations are able to disseminate
information regarding the destination in a more up-to-date and interactive way.
2.5 Research on the acceptance of METG
Recognising that its adoption by tourists is one of the obvious critical factors
influencing the widespread use of METG, a number of studies have attempted to
understand its adoption from a users point of view. However, most of these studies were
based on field experiments whereby tourists were invited to use the system and then
evaluate the experience (Cheverst et al., 2000; Schmidt-Belz et al., 2003). It was not until
recently that research on the acceptance of METG by a wider tourist base began to
appear. For example, Lee and Mills (2007) explored tourists’ satisfaction with a mobile
technology by surveying internet users. An underlying assumption of all these studies
is the critical influence of tourists’ evaluation of METG for the success of such systems.

Mobile electronic
tourist guides

125

JHTT
2,2

126

The importance of evaluating the tourists’ perceptions of METG is further
supported by the wider literature on the adoption of mobile handheld devices.
For example, Sarker and Wells’ (2003) input-process-output model of the adoption of
handheld devices views evaluation of the experience as a component of the process that
feeds into the output. In other words, usage of the innovation is directly influenced by
an evaluation of its use. According to Sarker and Wells (2003), evaluation of the
experience can take three forms: functional, psychosocial and relational. The functional
dimension refers to the availability of the system anytime and in anyplace and is
closely related to efficiency provided by access to information while on the move.
The psychosocial dimension includes issues such as security and privacy, while the
relational dimension involves evaluating the opportunities for communication with
other individuals. While consumers are likely to evaluate handheld devices based on
these three dimensions, their importance is likely to vary from individual to individual
and according to the specific content of the experience.
Kramer et al. (2007) conducted a field trial comparing the behaviour of tourists as they
were using a Planner providing a personalized guided tour and an Explorer displaying
the current location on a map and supplying information about sights on request. The
results indicate that users differ significantly in the way and extent to which they take
advantage of both mobile applications. The authors concluded that the Planner satisfies
the demand for guided tours additionally leaving much needed room for spontaneous
deviations. Surprisingly, tour duration, walking distances and number of sights visited
using these different mobile applications were similar to traditional guided tours.
Tjostheim and Fesenmaier (2008) developed an ethnographic approach to gain
insight into how a multimedia phone with GPS, maps and a mobile guide were used by
visitors to the city of Philadelphia. The authors found out that some of the visitors
seem to substitute traditional information sources with the navigation and map tools
on the mobile device.
Eriksson and Strandvik (2009) conducted a study to identify the determinants
affecting tourists intentions or actual use of mobile tourism services. The authors
identified that the major barriers for non-usage of the mobile services were the value
aspect of the packaged tour that the trial group participated in. The price transparency
and the ease of use especially ease to take new mobile services temporary into use
should be highlighted in mobile tourism service development.
According to the review of the existing literature in the area; in the next section,
we presented a conceptual model supported upon a number of hypothesis.
3. Research model and hypothesis
Based on the constructs identified by Fishbein and Azjen (1975) and adapted by
Davis (1989) to develop the TAM, a conceptual model of the acceptance of the METG
was developed. The model is supported upon a number of hypothesis derived from the
literature. Four constructs are included in the model: knowledge, usefulness, attitude
and intention.
3.1 Knowledge
The importance of considering knowledge when studying the adoption of innovations
has been emphasised in the past, notably by the work of Rogers (1995). Knowledge
occurs when an individual is exposed to an innovation’s existence and gains some

understanding of how it functions (Rogers, 1995). Knowledge is the result of the
learning stored in memory (Clarke and Belk, 1978). Rogers’ (1995) innovation decision
model considers knowledge as the first stage of the adoption process. Hence, this is a
critical stage since what happens at this stake influenced the remainder of the adoption
process. The TAM, in contrast, assumes that the person has gained enough knowledge
about the innovation. Yet this is a dubious assumption for innovations at the early
stages of their diffusion, when the amount of information available about the
innovation is limited, such as the case of METG. Thus, what remains unknown is the
extent to which knowledge influences the acceptance of the technology. Therefore, this
construct was included in the model as a potential influence on the other variables
derived from TAM (and explained below).
3.2 Usefulness
Perceived usefulness is the individual’s perception that using the information system
will improve one’s performance (Davis, 1989; Keen et al., 2004). Usefulness refers to the
outcome of using the system, rather than to the process leading to the final outcome,
which is captured by ease of use (Childers et al., 2001). Usefulness is similar to relative
advantage (Rogers, 1995) in that it concentrates on the extent to which using the new
system is perceived as being better that the one it supersedes. Traditionally, usefulness
has been measured through general measures. Given the early stages of adoption of
METG, in this study it was considered that a more detailed understanding of the users’
perceptions of the technical and functional attributes would provide more detailed
understanding regarding the perceived usefulness of METG. Wöber and Gretzel (2000)
found strong support for the impact of usefulness and ease of use on tourism
manager’s usage on the decision support systems. The authors also found that user’s
system expectations and technology attitude influenced usage. Considering the
multidimensionality of this construct, a composite index of usefulness was derived
from the evaluation of a set of characteristics associated with METG.
3.3 Attitude
In the field of consumer behaviour, attitudes have been defined as an overall evaluation
of the behaviour (Engel et al., 1995; Rogers, 1995; Fishbein and Azjen, 1975; Howard
and Sheth, 1969) and as predispositions to respond in a particular way toward a
specified behaviour or class of behaviours (Fishbein and Azjen, 1975; Rosenberg and
Hovland, 1960). The importance of attitude in consumer behaviour is demonstrated by
the fact that virtually all of the most influential models of consumer behaviour view
attitudes as a key variable influencing behaviour. Adding attitude towards behaviour
as a new component means that, in order to predict a specific behaviour, it is necessary
to measure a person’s attitude towards performing that behaviour, and not just general
attitude towards the object at which the behaviour is directed (Kassarjian and
Robertson, 1991). In voluntary behaviours, such as in the case of using METG, people
tend to perform behaviours that they evaluate favourably and avoid performing those
that are viewed negatively.
3.4 Intention
Behavioural intention to perform the behaviour has been shown to be an antecedent of
the behaviour itself (Ajzen and Fishbein, 1980). Ajzen and Fishbein (1980) suggested

Mobile electronic
tourist guides

127

JHTT
2,2

128

several measures of behavioural intention, but two main approaches to behavioural
intention can be identified: one covering the likelihood of performing the behaviour and
the other the intention to perform the behaviour. Intention and likelihood are different
phenomena. Whereas intention refers to a goal or purpose, likelihood refers to the
subjective probability that the behaviour will take place (i.e. that the goal or purpose
will be achieved). Intention refers to a predisposition while likelihood can be thought of
as resulting not only from that predisposition, but from other variables such as the
perception of adequate resources to perform the behaviour. A very important extension
of this line of literature is represented by several recent studies that take a step back
from testing relationships between user perceptions and intentions to use systems in
various contexts. These studies focus on factors that affect user perceptions, asking
why users come to a system with relatively positive or negative views about its
potential role in their activities. For instance, researchers have studied the effects of
social influence (Karahanna and Straub, 1999; Venkatesh and Davis, 2000) and
personal characteristics, such as gender (Venkatesh and Davis, 2000) and educational
level (Agarwal and Prasad, 1999).
Generally speaking, the stronger the tourists’ intention to use METG, the more
likely they are to use them (Cao and Mokhtarian, 2005). Therefore, behavioural
intention can be regarded as a surrogate measure of the tourists’ acceptance of METG.
Based on the relationships between variables postulated by the TRA and the TAM,
the following hypothesis were formulated:
H1. Knowledge of METG influences positively usefulness.
H2. Perceived usefulness influences positively a positive attitude towards using
METG.
H3. Attitude towards using METG influences positively the intention to use it in
the future.
H4. The level of knowledge about METG influences positively the intention to use
them in the future.
H5. Perceived usefulness influences positively the intention to use METG.
H6. The level of knowledge influences positively the attitude towards using
METG.
4. Methodology
4.1 Sample
To test the hypothesis of this study, data were collected from a stratified sample of
international tourists departing from Lisbon International Airport (Portugal) between
October and November, 2006. The definition of the sample was based on the number of
passengers departing from Lisbon’s Airport to European Union countries in 2005.
The sample was randomly stratified by season and nationality. In order to achieve a
95 per cent level of confidence, 600 questionnaires were collected. European Union
nationals using Lisbon Airport come mainly from France, Spain (including islands), the
UK and other countries (Italy, The Netherlands and Germany). Together the nationals
of these countries account for around 60 per cent of departures from the airport. Using
the number of departures from each of the above four groups, a minimum number

of questionnaires were established: 107 from French nationals, 140 from Spanish, 85
from British and 268 from other nationalities. From the 600 questionnaires, 400 were
retained for analysis in this study, which represents a response rate of 67 per cent, an
acceptable standard according to Dillman (1978). This procedure ensures the
generalizability of the data, meaning that the findings are applicable to a more general
population. The 400 questionnaires correspond to a sampling error of 2.8 per cent with
a confidence interval of 95 per cent.
The questionnaires were discharged because tourists who responded were not
aware of METG or due to the number of missing values.
A questionnaire administered face to face was chosen to collect data. Respondents
were randomly approached at the check-in area of the airport. Interviewing
respondents at the check-in area were selected for three main reasons. First, it was
possible to identify where the tourists were travelling to, facilitating the selection of the
nationals from the required countries. Second, because tourists were queuing, there
was little competition from other activities for the traveller’s time and attention. Thus,
they tend to be more willing to participate, increasing the response rate. Finally, by
approaching tourists at departure, it was possible to analyse their use of information
sources, including METG, during their stay.
Also, several steps were taken to ensure the generalizability, validity and reliability
of the data. The survey was constructed based on the previously identified surveys
(Zipf and Malaka, 2001; Krug et al., 2003). The survey was adapted to fulfill the
purpose of the study and organized to avoid bias throughout the answering process.
In addition, the questionnaire was pre-tested with a sub-sample of 50 passengers from
which minor amendments were made.
4.2 Measurement of the constructs
Knowledge was measured by one statement focusing on the tourists’ level of knowledge
of METG (Krug et al., 2003), ranging from “no knowledge” to “know extremely well”
(five-point scale). As far as usefulness is concerned, respondents were asked to rate the
performance of METG on a range of 16 attributes based on Zipf and Malaka (2001) and
Krug et al. (2003), highlighting all the characteristics that could be perceived to be
reflecting usefulness. Usefulness was approached from a confirmation-disconfirmation
point of view (Oliver, 1980; Danaher and Haddrell, 1996; Szymanski and Henard, 2001)
and thus was measured using a five-point scale, ranging from “much worse than
expected” to “much better than expected”. Attitude was measured using one statement
pertaining to the overall evaluation of the experience (five-point scale from “really
dislike” to “like very much”). Finally, behavioural intention was measured using one
item asking respondents about the likelihood of future usage of METG (five-point scale
from “no intention” to “intend to use for sure”).
4.3 Data analysis
Structural equation modeling (SEM) was used to identify the indicators of intention to
use METG. SEM specifies and estimates multi-equations models of latent variables
(non-observable) that are anchored in observable (measurable) variables. The analysis
of structural models consists of two stages (Hair et al., 1998). First, exploratory factor
analysis (EFA) is performed in order to identify the variables that make up each of the
latent variables. Second, confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) is performed to confirm

Mobile electronic
tourist guides

129

JHTT
2,2

130

the results of the EFA and to ascertain if all the constructs correlate freely. Next, the
measurement model that provides the best fit for the data is estimated. In other words,
the analysis identifies whether it is possible to improve the structural model until the
best fit is achieved. Three types of measures were used to test the overall fit of model.
The absolute fit index assesses how well the theoretical model fits the data, while the
incremental fit index evaluates the proportionate fit by comparing a target model with
a more restricted, nested baseline model (Hu and Bentler, 1995). Finally, the moderated
index gauges the degree to which the model fits the data. After testing the hypothesis,
a standardized regression coefficient is produced for each significant path, showing the
direction and the strength of the relationships.
5. Results
The EFA measures the latent variable usefulness. The development of the
measurement scales was performed in order to reduce the dimensionality of the data
and to identify the main factors relating to usefulness. As Table I shows, the initial
16 items used to measure usefulness where reduced to two new factors, which together
accounted for 70.5 per cent of the total variance (KMO ¼ 0.81; Bartlett test: p ¼ 0.000).
The internal consistency of these factors, measured by the corresponding Cronbach’s
a coefficients, is very good (i.e. they are at least equal or superior to 0.9 in all cases).
The results suggest that the usefulness of METG is determined by its functionality and
quality. Generally speaking, functionality involves availability, trust and presentation,
whereas quality is associated with quality, ease of use and currentness. The usefulness
construct was referred to a composite index of the two factors: functionality and
quality.
A CFA model assessed and validated the measurement model of the determinants of
latent variable usefulness, knowledge, attitude and intention. This model fits the data
well which allows to proceed with the structural model to test the conceptual model.
Loadings
Functionality

Table I.
Usefulness: results
of the EFA

Mobility
Flexibility
Functionality
Speed of access
Availability
Information organisation
Presentation
Size
Trust
Price
Currentness
Quality
Veracity
Ease of use
Simplicity
Quantity
Percentage of variance (total: 70.5)
Cronbach’s a

Quality

Mean

0.84
0.82
0.78
0.76
0.65
0.62
7.1
0.920

2.71
2.72
2.74
2.71
2.88
2.79
2.84
2.59
2.86
2.75
2.93
2.99
2.88
2.97
2.91
2.77
–
–

0.82
0.82
0.79
0.77
0.73
0.72
0.70
0.68
0.64
0.54

63.4
0.949

Six cause-effect relationships between the different variables were established:
usefulness was determined by knowledge (H1), a favourable attitude was dependent on
a positive perceived usefulness (H2) and intention was dependent on attitude (H3). In
addition, the model speculated that intention was determined by knowledge (H4),
usefulness was related to intention (H5) and attitude was determined by knowledge
(H6). The model was estimated using the asymptotical distribution-free methods as
this can accommodate variables using different types of scale.
The results of the initial-estimated model revealed several relationships that were
not statistically significant and the removal of these relationships improved the
performance of the various indices. The fit indices of the structural model indicate a
good fit to the data (Table II). The values of the incremental fix indices are close to 1
and the values of the absolute indices close to 0, while the p value of the x 2 is
non-significant. The standardized regression coefficients of the paths are statistically
significant at the 0.001 or 0.05 level (Figure 1), providing support for four out of the
six hypothesised relationships.
The estimate for H1 is 0.706 ( p , 0.001), indicating the existence of a strong
positive effect of knowledge on perceived usefulness. There was also a positive
relationship between perceived usefulness and attitude (b ¼ 0.184; p , 0.05),
suggesting that the greater the level of perceived usefulness, the more positive was
the attitude towards using METG. Thus, H2 cannot be rejected. Hypothesising a
sequential decision process by tourists, the model speculated that a more positive
attitude would lead to a greater level of intention. The positive regression coefficient
Absolute fix index

Mobile electronic
tourist guides

131

Incremental fix index

RMSR ¼ 0.021
RMSEA ¼ 0.011

AGFI ¼ 0.968
NFI ¼ 0.965
TLI ¼ 0.995
IFI ¼ 0.998
RFI ¼ 0.895
CFI ¼ 0.998
GFI ¼ 0.994

x 2 ¼ 2.096
p ¼ 0.351; df ¼ 2

Table II.
Measures of the
structural model

Knowledge
H1

H2

Attitude

H3

Usefulness

H4

Intention

Figure 1.
Conceptual model

JHTT
2,2

132

(b ¼ 0.219; p , 0.001) indicates that H3 cannot be rejected. Given the relative newness
of the system in the market, it was also hypothesised that knowledge would be a
determinant of intention (H4). The results indicate that the greater the knowledge, the
more positive the intention as given by the positive and significant regression
coefficient (b ¼ 0.163; p , 0.001). Finally, the path coefficients from perceived
usefulness to intention (H5) as well as the new proposed path relationship from
knowledge to attitude (H6) did not show a significant result. Thus, both hypotheses are
not accepted (Figure 2).
6. Conclusions and managerial implications
Searching and using information is an important activity performed by tourists which
can greatly affect the way they experience the destination. Similar to many other areas of
the tourism industry, technological developments are re-shaping the way destinations
interact with tourists. The potential of mobile technologies is significant, given that they
provide access to dynamic tourist information that follows tourists wherever they go.
At a time where the number of people living a “wired” lifestyle is growing, destinations
need to engage themselves in the process of making the most of the opportunities these
technological developments entail. In this context, METG appear to be one important
platform for the delivery of services supported upon mobile technologies. In an attempt
to enhance our understanding of the adoption of this service by tourists, this paper
developed and tested a model for examining tourists’ acceptance of METG. Adaptation
the TAM (Davis, 1989) as theoretical underpinning, the overall contention of this paper
was that behavioural intention is an important indicator for tourists’ acceptance of
METG. The model considered three antecedents of intention: knowledge, usefulness and
attitude. The relationships between them and between these and intention were explored
using SEM.
0.199

Knowledge

0.706**

0.361

Attitude

0.184*

0.219**

Usefulness
0.163**

Intention

Figure 2.
Results of structural
model for the intention
to use METG

0.133
Notes: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.001

0.335

The findings revealed that tourists’ behavioural intentions could be raised through
attitude by ensuring greater levels of perceived usefulness. Usefulness, in turn, is
highly influenced by the tourists’ level of knowledge regarding METG. In addition,
there was also a direct significant path between knowledge and behavioural intention,
suggesting that good levels of knowledge of the service are a pre-condition for greater
of usage of METG. From these results, it is clear that an education programme is
required. This programme should focus on developing two types of knowledge
(Rogers, 1995): awareness knowledge (information that METG exist), how-to
knowledge (information required to use METG). The extent to which individuals
develop these two types of knowledge appears to be a critical influence on adoption,
given that without knowing that METG exist and holding some understanding of how
it functions adoption will not take place. Simultaneously, communication of the
benefits and their delivery are required in order to ensure greater levels of usage of
METG. This task requires a joint effort by technology, tourism and electronic guides
suppliers, as well as the tourist board. The communication strategy needs to focus on
the three levels: knowledge, usefulness and attitude. Rogers (1995) argues that the
extent to which consumers trial the innovation influences its adoption. Providing
opportunities for trial in a more restricted environment, such as tourist attractions,
could not only ensure that tourists are made aware of such systems, but helping them
to realise the usefulness of METG.
The results of this paper have important theoretical implications. TAM assumes
that ease of use and usefulness are important predictors of behavioural intention.
This study indicates that usefulness could be depicted through the main characteristics
of METG. Furthermore, despite the importance of usefulness, knowledge is much more
important at least in the early stages of adoption of a technology as it is the case of
METG. This casts doubt over the predictive ability of the TAM in the context of
innovations at their early stages of diffusion and where potential adopters know little
about them. Therefore, conceptual models studying the acceptance of this type of
innovations should incorporate knowledge as an explanatory variable.
In sum, the degree of acceptance of METG by tourists suggests that learning starts
with knowledge, which then contributes to forming perceptions about them
(usefulness) which influences behavioural intentions. However, knowing about a
technology does not mean the person uses it or even holds a positive attitude towards
it. Despite evidence suggesting the importance of knowledge in the adoption of METG,
a large number of tourists still do not use them.
Future studies could use the full version of the TAM by including other measures of
knowledge beyond awareness knowledge, such as how-to knowledge, as suggested by
Rogers (1995). Moreover, the model could be tested in different settings, including
different destinations. This study did not differentiate between types of tourists, such
as tourists from different nationalities or travelling for different types of motives
(e.g. leisure versus business). Hence, future studies could attempt to understand if the
intention to adopt METG is influenced by different segments and also in further
studies should considered knowledge as a multidimensional construct in the intention
to adopt this channel of information.
The findings of this study contribute to enhancing our understanding of how
tourists perceive using mobile technologies in the context of the travelling experience.
They can be used to inform local and national strategies aimed at developing

Mobile electronic
tourist guides

133

JHTT
2,2

Portugal’s (and other countries’) credentials as digital destinations. This study
identified a number of issues that need to be addressed if greater levels of usage of the
service are to be achieved. Ultimately, developing a high-quality mobile technology
experience will not only improve the tourist’s knowledge and experience of the
destination, but also enhance its innovative and creative image among potential and
actual tourists.

134
References
Adams, D.A., Nelson, R.R. and Todd, P.A. (1992), “PU, ease of use, and usage of information
technology: a replication”, MIS Quarterly, June, pp. 227-47.
Agarwal, R. and Prasad, J. (1997), “The role of innovation characteristics and perceived
voluntariness in the acceptance of information technologies”, Decision Sciences, Vol. 28
No. 3, pp. 557-82.
Agarwal, R. and Prasad, J. (1999), “Are individual differences germane to the acceptance of new
information technologies?”, Decision Sciences, Vol. 30 No. 2, pp. 361-91.
Ajzen, I. and Fishbein, M. (1980), Understanding Attitudes and Predicting Social Behaviour,
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Atkinson, M.A. and Kydd, C. (1997), “Individual characteristics associated with World Wide Web
use: an empirical study of playfulness and motivation”, Data Base for Advances in
Information Systems, Vol. 28 No. 2, pp. 53-62.
Cao, X. and Mokhtarian, P.L. (2005), The Intended and Actual Adoption of Online Purchasing:
A Brief Review of Recent Literature, Institute of Transport Studies, University of
California, Davis, CA.
Chen, L. and Tan, J. (2004), “Technology adaptation in e-commerce: key determinants of virtual
sores acceptance”, European Management Journal, Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 74-86.
Chen, L., Gillenson, M. and Sherrel, D. (2002), “Enticing online consumers: an extended
technology acceptance perspective”, Information & Management, Vol. 39, pp. 705-19.
Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Mitchel, K., Friday, A. and Efstratiou, C. (2000), “Developing a
context-aware electronic tourist guide: some issues and experiences”, Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, The Hague,
The Netherlands, ACM, New York, NY, pp. 17-24.
Childers, T., Carr, C., Peck, J. and Carson, S. (2001), “Hedonic and utilitarian motivations for
online retail shopping behaviour”, Journal of Retailing, Vol. 77, pp. 511-35.
Chin, W.W. and Gopal, A. (1995), “Adoption intention in GSS: relative importance of beliefs”,
DATA BASE for Advances in Information Systems, Vol. 26 Nos 2-3, pp. 42-64.
Clarke, K. and Belk, R.W. (1978), “The effects of product involvement and task definition on
anticipated consumer effort”, in Hunt, H.K. (Ed.), Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 5,
Association for Consumer Research, Ann Arbor, MI, pp. 313-18.
Compeau, D.R. and Higgins, C.A. (1995), “Computer self-efficacy: development of a measure and
initial test”, MIS Quarterly, Vol. 19 No. 2, pp. 189-211.
Cooper, S. and Donald, I. (2001), “A facet approach to extending the normative components of the
theory of reasoned action”, British Journal of Social Psychology, Vol. 40, pp. 599-621.
Danaher, P. and Haddrell, V. (1996), “A comparison of question scales used for measuring
customer satisfaction”, International Journal of Service Industry Management, Vol. 7 No. 4,
pp. 4-26.

Davis, F.D. (1986), “A technology acceptance model for empirically testing new end-user
information systems: theory and results”, doctoral dissertation, Sloan School of
Management, MIT, Cambridge, MA.
Davis, F.D. (1989), “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use and user acceptance of
information technology”, MIS Quarterly, September, pp. 319-39.
Davis, F., Bagozzi, R. and Warshaw, P. (1989), “User acceptance of computer technology:
a comparison of two theoretical models”, Management Science, Vol. 35 No. 8, pp. 982-1003.
Dillman, D.A. (1978), Mail and Telephone Surveys, the Total Design Method, Wiley, New York, NY.
DiPietro, R.B., Wang, Y., Rompf, P. and Severt, D. (2007), “At-destination visitor information
search and venue decision strategies”, International Journal of Tourism Research, Vol. 9
No. 3, pp. 175-88.
Engel, J., Blackwell, R. and Miniard, P. (1995), Consumer Behaviour, 8th ed., The Dryden Press,
Forth Worth, TX.
Eriksson, N. and Strandvik, P. (2009), “Possible determinants affecting the use of mobile tourism
services”, Communications in Computer and Information Science, Vol. 48 No. 2, pp. 61-73.
Fenech, T. (1998), “Using perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness to predict acceptance of
the World Wide Web”, Computer Networks & ISDN Systems, Vol. 30, pp. 629-30.
Fishbein, M. and Azjen, I. (1975), Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behavior, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA.
Flognfeldt, T. and Nordgren, R.F. (1999), “Information use for decision of making temporary
stops along tourist routes in Norway”, paper presented at Annual TTRA Conference,
Halifax.
Fodness, D. and Murray, B. (1999), “A model of tourist information search behavior”, Journal of
Travel Research, Vol. 37 No. 1, pp. 220-30.
Gitelson, R.J. and Crompton, J.L. (1993), “The planning horizons and sources of information used
by pleasure vacationers”, Journal of Travel Research, Vol. 21 No. 3, pp. 2-7.
Goeldner, C.R. and Ritchie, J.R. (2003), Tourism – Principles, Practices, Philosophies, 9th ed.,
Wiley, Hoboken, NJ.
Gursoy, D. and Chen, J. (2000), “Competitive analysis of cross cultural information search
behavior”, Tourism Management, Vol. 21 No. 6, pp. 583-90.
Gursoy, D. and Umbreit, W. (2004), “Tourist information search behaviour: cross-cultural
comparison of European Union member states”, International Journal of Hospitality
Management, Vol. 23, pp. 55-70.
Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.E., Tatham, R.L. and Black, W.C. (1998), Multivariate Data Analysis,
5th ed., Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Hendrickson, A.R., Massey, P.D. and Cronan, T.P. (1993), “On the test-retest reliability of PU and
PEU scales”, MIS Quarterly, June, pp. 227-30.
Ho, S., Ahn, J. and Kim, B. (2003), “Adoption of broadband internet in Korea: the role of
experience in building attitudes”, Journal of Information Technology, Vol. 18, December,
pp. 267-80.
Howard, J. and Sheth, A. (1969), The Theory of Buyer Behaviour, Wiley, New York, NY.
Hsieh, S. and O’Leary, J.T. (1993), “Communication channels to segment pleasure travelers”,
in Usay, M. and Fesenmaier, D. (Eds), Communication and Channels Systems in Tourism
Marketing, The Hawthorn Press, New York, NY.
Hu, L.T. and Bentler, P. (1995), “Evaluating model fit”, in Hoyle, R. (Ed.), Structural Equation
Modeling: Concepts, Issues, and Applications, Sage, London, pp. 76-99.

Mobile electronic
tourist guides

135

JHTT
2,2

136

Igbaria, M. and Iivari, J. (1995), “The effects of self-efficacy on computer usage”, Omega, Vol. 23
No. 6, pp. 587-605.
Igbaria, M., Guimaraes, T. and Davis, B.D. (1995), “Testing the determinants of microcomputer
usage via a structural equation model”, Journal of Management Information Systems,
Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 87-114.
Karahanna, E. and Straub, D. (1999), “The psychological origins of perceived usefulness and ease
of use”, Information & Management, Vol. 35, pp. 237-50.
Kassarjian, H.H. and Robertson, T.S. (1991), Perspectives in Consumer Behaviour, 4th ed.,
Prentice-Hall, Engelwood Cliffs, NJ.
Keen, C., Wetzels, M., Ruyter, K. and Feinberg, R. (2004), “E-tailers versus retailers: which factors
determine consumer preference”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 57 No. 7, pp. 685-95.
Kramer, R., Modsching, M., Hagen, K. and Gretzel, U. (2007), “Behavioural impacts of mobile tour
guides”, Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism, Vol. 3, pp. 109-18.
Krug, K., Abderhalden, W. and Haller, R. (2003), “User needs for location-based services in
protected areas: case study Swiss National Park”, Information Technology & Tourism,
Vol. 5 No. 4, pp. 235-42.
Lee, J. and Mills, J. (2007), “Exploring tourist satisfaction with mobile technology”, in Sigala, M.,
Mich, L. and Murphy, J. (Eds), Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism,
Springer, Wien, pp. 141-52.
Liaw, S. (2002), “Understanding user perceptions of world-wide web environments”, Journal of
Computer Assisted Learning, Vol. 18, pp. 137-48.
Luarn, P. and Lin, H. (2005), “Toward an understanding of the behavioural intention to use
mobile banking”, Computers in Human Behaviour, Vol. 21, pp. 873-91.
Mansfeld, Y. (1992), “From motivation to actual travel”, Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 19,
pp. 399-419.
Mathieson, A. and Wall, G. (1982), Tourism: Economic, Physical and Social Impacts, Longman,
London.
Mathieson, K. (1991), “Predicting user intentions: comparing the technology acceptance model
with the theory of planned behaviour”, Information Systems Research, Vol. 2 No. 3,
pp. 173-91.
Mathieson, K., Peacock, E. and Lin, W. (2001), “Extending the technology acceptance model: the
influence of perceived user resources”, Database for Advances in Information Systems,
Vol. 32 No. 3, pp. 86-112.
Mintel (2006), Independent Travel – UK – September, Mintel International Group Ltd, London,
available at: http://reports.mintel.com/ (accessed 30 September 2007).
Mozeith, C., Belbona, S. and Cohanoglu (2009), “The adoption of restaurant-based e-service”,
Journal of Foodservice Business Research, Vol. 12 No. 3, pp. 247-65.
Nishimura, S., King, B. and Waryszak, R. (2007), “The use of travel guidebooks by packaged and
non-packaged Japanese travellers: a comparative study”, Journal of Vacation Marketing,
Vol. 13 No. 4, pp. 291-310.
Nishimura, S., Waryszak, R. and King, B. (2006), “The use and perceived usefulness of
information sources among Japanese overseas tourists”, Tourism and Hospitality
Research, Vol. 6 No. 4, pp. 284-95.
Oliver, R. (1980), “A cognitive model of antecedents and consequences of satisfaction decisions”,
Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 17, pp. 460-9.
Rogers, E. (1995), The Diffusion of Innovations, 4th ed., The Free Press, New York, NY.

Rompf, P., DiPietro, R.B. and Ricci, P. (2005), “Locals’ involvement in travelers’ information
search and venue decision strategies while at destination”, Journal of Travel and Tourism
Marketing, Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 11-22.

Mobile electronic
tourist guides

Rosenberg, M. and Hovland, C. (1960), “Cognitive, affective and behavioural components of
attitudes”, in Rosenberg, M., Hovland, C., McGuire, W., Abelson, R. and Brehm, J. (Eds),
Attitude Organisation and Change, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, pp. 1-14.
Sandhu, K. and Corbitt, B. (2002), “Exploring an understanding of electronic service end-user
adoption”, The International Federation for Information Processing, WG8.6, Sydney.
Sarker, S. and Wells, J. (2003), “Understanding mobile handheld device, use and adoption”,
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 46, p. 12.
Schmidt-Belz, B., Laamanen, H., Poslad, S. and Zipf, A. (2003), “Location-based mobile tourist
services: first user experiences”, in Frew, A., Hitz, M. and O’Connor, P. (Eds), Information
and Communication Technologies in Tourism, Springer, Wien, pp. 115-23.
Segars, A.H. and Grover, V. (1998), “Strategic information systems planning success:
an investigation of the construct and its measurement”, MISQ, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 139-63.
Sheldon, P. (1997), Tourism Information Technology, CABI, Wallingford.
Snepenger, D., Meged, K., Snelling, M. and Worral, K. (1990), “Information search strategies by
destinations-naive tourists”, Journal Travel Research, Vol. 29 No. 1, pp. 13-16.
Straub, D., Limayem, M. and Karahanna-Evaristo, E. (1995), “Measuring system usage:
implications for IS theory testing”, Management Science, Vol. 41 No. 8, pp. 1328-42.
Subramanian, G.H. (1994), “A replication of PU and PEU measurement”, Decision Sciences,
Vol. 25 Nos 5/6, pp. 863-74.
Szymanski, D. and Henard, D. (2001), “Customer satisfaction: a meta-analysis of the empirical
evidence”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, Vol. 29 No. 1, pp. 16-35.
Tjostheim, I. and Fesenmaier, D. (2008), “Mobile devices as substitute or supplement to
traditional information sources: city tourists, mobile guides and GPS navigation”,
Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism, Vol. 10, pp. 324-35.
Venkatesh, V. (2000), “Determinants of perceived ease of use: integrating perceived behavioral
control, computer anxiety and enjoyment into the technology acceptance model”,
Information Systems Research, Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 342-65.
Venkatesh, V. and Davis, F.D. (1996), “A model of the antecedents of PEU: development and
test”, Decision Sciences, Vol. 27 No. 3, pp. 451-81.
Venkatesh, V. and Davis, F. (2000), “A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model:
four longitudinal field studies”, Management Science, Vol. 46 No. 2, pp. 186-204.
Vijayasarathy, L. (2004), “Predicting consumer intentions to use online shopping: the case for an
augmented technology acceptance model”, Information & Management, Vol. 41,
pp. 747-62.
Vogt, C. and Fesenmaier, D. (1998), “Expanding the functional information search model”,
Annals of Tourism Research, Vol. 25, pp. 551-78.
Watson, R.T., Akselsen, S., Monod, E. and Pitt, L. (2004), “The open tourism consortium: laying
the foundations for the future of tourism”, European Management Review, Vol. 22 No. 3,
pp. 315-26.
Wöber, K. and Gretzel, U. (2000), “‘Tourism managers’ adoption of marketing decision support
systems”, Journal of Travel Research, Vol. 39 No. 2, pp. 172-81.

137

JHTT
2,2

138

Yi, M.Y. and Venkatesh, V. (1996), “Role of computer self-efficacy in predicting user acceptance
and use of information technology”, Proceedings of the Americas Conference on
Information Systems, Phoenix, AZ, pp. 244-6.
Yoon, Y. and Uysal, M. (2005), “An examination of the effects of motivation and satisfaction on
destination loyalty: a structural model”, Tourism Management, Vol. 26 No. 1, pp. 45-56.
Yuksel, A. and Yuksel, F. (2002), “Market segmentation based on tourists’ dining preferences”,
Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Research, Vol. 26, pp. 315-31.
Zipf, A. and Malaka, R. (2001), “Developing location based services for tourism: the service
providers’ view”, in Sheldon, P. (Ed.), Information and Communication Technologies in
Tourism, Springer, Wien, pp. 83-92.
Further reading
Correia, A., Valle, P. and Moço, C. (2007), “Modelling motivations and perceptions of Portuguese
tourists”, Journal of Business Research, Vol. 60, pp. 76-80.
George, J. (2002), “Influences on the intent to make internet purchases”, Internet Research:
Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, Vol. 12 No. 2, pp. 165-80.
Corresponding author
Rita Peres can be contacted at: rita.peres@eshte.pt

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints

