See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220116442

The inﬂuence of personality factors on visitor attitudes
towards adaptivity dimensions for mobile museum
guides
Article in User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction · March 2006
DOI: 10.1007/s11257-006-9004-7 · Source: DBLP

CITATIONS

READS

54

222

4 authors, including:
Dina Goren Bar

Fabio Pianesi

Afeka Tel-Aviv Academic College of Engineering

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

51 PUBLICATIONS 969 CITATIONS

205 PUBLICATIONS 4,872 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Massimo Zancanaro
Fondazione Bruno Kessler
250 PUBLICATIONS 4,093 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Design Exploration of Wearable Devices for Learning to Climb View project

Psychometric Attribute Prediction from Digital Data View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Massimo Zancanaro on 09 August 2018.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62
DOI 10.1007/s11257-006-9004-7
O R I G I NA L PA P E R

The influence of personality factors on visitor attitudes
towards adaptivity dimensions for mobile museum
guides
Dina Goren-Bar · Ilenia Graziola · Fabio Pianesi ·
Massimo Zancanaro

Received: 18 June 2005 / Accepted in revised form:
16 April 2006 / Published online: 5 July 2006
© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2006

Abstract In this work, we present a study on adaptation in a mobile museum guide,
investigating the relationships between personality traits, and the attitudes towards
some basic dimensions of adaptivity. Each participant was exposed to two simulated
systems—one adaptive, the other not—on each of the dimensions investigated. The
study showed that the personality traits relating to the notion of control (conscientiousness, neuroticism/emotional stability, Locus of Control) have a selective effect
on the acceptance of the adaptivity dimensions.
Keywords Adaptivity · Mobile Information Presentation · HCI · Human Factors
User Evaluation
1 Introduction
This work addresses people’s attitudes towards dimensions of adaptivity for a mobile
museum guide. In doing so, we studied whether and how those attitudes are affected
by personality traits.
Many research projects are exploring new presentation possibilities for the
museum setting that personal digital assistants (PDAs) make possible (see among
others Cigliano and Monaci 2003; Grinter et al. 2002). The value of multimedia for
a mobile museum guide is discussed by Proctor and Tellis (2003), who present an
extended user study conducted at Modern Tate in 2002. In our own work (Alfaro
et al. 2004), we showed that the application of cinematography rules to multimedia
presentations played on a mobile museum guide helps to decrease cognitive overload.
An important research area focuses on personalization, context aware computing
and adaptivity; these issues are recognized as forming one of the three challenges for
ubiquitous computing (Abwod and Mynatt 2000). Many studies have investigated
D. Goren-Bar (B) · I. Graziola · F. Pianesi · M. Zancanaro
Institute for Scientific and Technological Research – ITC-irst
38050 Povo, Italy
e-mail: gorenbar@itc.it

32

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

these topics in the context of museum guides. For example, the GUIDE system
presented in (Cheverst et al. 2002) adapts web-like presentations by adding information about nearby attractions that might be interesting for the visitor of a city. The
HIPPIE system proposes personalized tours in a museum by maintaining a model
of user interests and knowledge (Oppermann and Specht 2000). The REAL system
(Baus et al. 2002) adapts route descriptions according to the actual user position, the
limited technical resources of the device, and the cognitive resources of the user. In
our own work (Rocchi et al. 2004), we experimented with adaptive video presentations which are dynamically composed by the system by adding or removing shots
in order to provide background information, detailed descriptions and comparisons,
according to user interest and the history of the visit.
For the GUIDE system, an observational study was conducted to assess visitor
acceptance of the prototype as a whole (Cheverst et al. 2002), with interesting findings about the perceived values of the features proposed. The HIPPIE system was
evaluated by domain experts and educators (Oppermann and Specht 2000), with very
positive results. For the HyperAudio adaptive system, a pervasive survey was conducted to elicit user preferences regarding personalization (Petrelli and Not 2005);
the authors mainly focused on user modeling, concluding that user profiles should
be abandoned in favor of visit types as a basis for adaptation in museums. A somewhat different approach is to look for insights about the importance of more abstract
dimensions in a principled way, and then use prototypes and user evaluations as tools
to support the discussion, such as in the seminal work of Horvitz (1999). A comprehensive survey of the evaluation techniques used for adaptive systems in general can
be found in (Gena 2005).
In all these cases, with the possible exception of Horvitz (1999), efforts targeted
specific systems, or parts thereof. Less attention has been paid so far to investigating
the attitudes and dispositions of (potential) users towards the very idea of adaptivity,
or abstract/basic dimensions thereof. Admittedly, the study of the acceptability of
adaptation is not an easy task, especially if conducted by having subjects use real
systems. Even with a low-fi mockup (Preece et al. 2002), in fact, the results will always
be tied to that particular implementation, and be subject to noise due to intervening
factors. Moreover, the fact of being involved in direct interaction with the system
often makes it difficult for the subjects to perceive and assess certain aspects that are
of a more holistic nature such as, e.g., content adaptation with respect to the history
of the interaction.
Adaptivity is a technological approach whereby systems monitor and manipulate
personal needs and interests. Because of its very nature, it is expected that personal
differences play an important role in explaining adaptivity acceptance and, more generally, people’s attitude towards it. There are findings in the literature that provide
some initial support to this view. For instance, it is often emphasized and recommended that users be allowed to have the feeling of being in control of the interaction
(Shneiderman 1998). According to Norman (1998), (the feeling of being in) control
over the interaction is an important component of people’s comfort with technologies. Several studies have discussed these issues in the context of adaptive systems
(Wexelblat and Maes 1997; Jameson and Schwarzkopf 2002), all of them pointing to
the opportunity of increasing the controllability of all aspects of system adaptation.
While discussing the ways in which learners can be given control over learner-adapted
teaching systems, Kay (2001) observes that some users may have less desire for control
than others. She also suggests that those users might find the exercise of too much

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

33

control distracting or a waste of time, and negatively react to systems that they find too
demanding in these respects. Thus, control is not only a crucial issue for understanding
the adaptive/non-adaptive continuum, but seems to be sensitive to personality difference. As a first, rough working hypothesis, one might expect that the more people care
about control issues, the more they exhibit a negative attitude/disposition towards, or
lower acceptance of, adaptivity.
In this work, we investigate the attitudes towards adaptivity dimensions in a mobile
museum guide setting, and the role that personality factors play in affecting and
determining them. As a working framework, we used the Computer as a Social Agent
(CASA). CASA has demonstrated that personality factors can determine the way
people place themselves along the so-called “computing technology continuum of perspective” (Johnson et al. 2001, 2006; Falaleeva and Johnson 2002; Marakas et al. 2000),
and that these factors affect people’s sensitivity to the social nature of technologies.
The results show that some of the personality factors considered here affect the way
our subjects perceive adaptivity, and do so in a selective manner. Interestingly, these
traits—Locus of Control (Rotter 1966), and conscientiousness, neuroticism/emotional
stability, as captured by the Big Five model (McCrae and John 1992; De Raad
2000)—all relate to the broad notion of control.
These results confirm the expectations of the CASA framework, and specify them
with respect to adaptive technologies. In particular, people who are highly sensitive to the social facets of technology because of their external Locus of Control
(LoC) and/or their neuroticism tend to reject adaptivity, either globally (LoC) or on
specific dimensions (content adaptation on the basis of interest for low emotionally
stable people), in both cases preferring the less social, more traditional (probably
more reassuring) non-adaptive technology. Similarly, people who have good control
of their own impulses tend to dislike delegating the start of a presentation to the
system on the basis of location awareness, and also dislike content adaptation on the
basis of interest.
Beyond the general interest of these findings for the purpose of better understanding the relationship between users and adaptive systems, an important practical consequence is that any evaluation of actual mobile guides can be systematically biased
unless the personality of the users is explicitly controlled for, or otherwise taken into
account. Concerning their importance for design practices and guidelines, as discussed
in section 2 and section 6, more research is needed to investigate the relationships
between attitudes and behaviour before this can be done (see for example Goren-Bar
et al. 2005a, b). It is possible, however, to envisage systems that can discover user personality traits from very early interactions, and then use this knowledge to dynamically
increase or decrease its own control over the relevant dimensions of adaptivity.
This paper is structured as follows: in Sect. 2 we lay down the empirical and
theoretical framework for our research, focusing on personality and attitudes. While
acknowledging our debt to many of them, we will argue that addressing the acceptability of the very idea of adaptivity, as articulated in basic dimensions, can be profitably
pursued by means of an attitudinal approach. We then go on articulating the notion of
attitudes and attitudinal study, and introduce the framework for studying the effects
of personality. In Sect. 3, we present the adaptivity dimensions and their rationale.
Sect. 4 describes the study in detail, discussing the design, the material and the procedure we used. In Sect. 5, results are reported, while Sect. 6 discusses them and looks at
the limitations of this study. Finally, Sect. 7 draws conclusions and points to interesting
future research paths.

34

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

2 Understanding adaptive systems—the effect of personality on attitudes
In a review study on evaluation of adaptive systems, Chin (2001) reported more than
30 papers addressing, in one way or another, the empirical evaluation of adaptive
hypermedia and hypertext, student modeling systems, and other related technologies.
Evaluation criteria included both quantitative and qualitative methods; yet, all the
approaches were similar in their aim to evaluate a specific adaptive system, focusing
on overall user performance and the user satisfaction.
According to the “layered evaluation framework” (Totterdell and Boyle 1990;
Brusilovsky et al. 2004), the success of adaptation can be addressed at two distinct
layers, reflecting the main phases of the adaptation processes, namely, user modeling and adaptive decision making. Although the two phases are both important for
the success of adaptation, they are also independent because the same user modeling outcomes may result in significantly different adaptation decisions. Hence, separate evaluations can contribute to the generalization and re-use of the results across
different applications.
Our study aims to contribute to an (as general as possible) model of user attitude
towards adaptivity in the domain of audio-video guides. In particular, we study the
effects of some personality traits on attitudes towards some general dimensions of
adaptivity that fit into the adaptive decision making layer. In doing so, we focus on the
logic of adaptation rather than on any specific mechanism realizing those dimensions.
Our approach exploits, at least partly, Bandura’s (1997) suggestion that a triadic relationship exists in which personal traits, the situation context, and behavior interact
and affect each other. Here, the focus is on the relationship between personal traits
and attitudes towards technology; the relationships between the latter and behavior
are not considered (see Sect. 2.2). This section discusses the frameworks adopted for
personality, Sect. 2.1, and for attitudes, Sect. 2.2. The dimensions of adaptivity are
discussed in Sect. 3.

2.1 Personality
Personality is a crucial factor in the acceptance or rejection of technology, as many
studies have shown e.g., Agarwal and Karahanna (2000) and Falaleeva and Johnson
(2002) for web technologies, Webster and Martocchio (1995) for the effect of personality on the state of flow with computing technologies, etc.
Of particular relevance to our topic (adaptive technologies) is the work carried
out within the CASA framework which aimed at understanding the role played by
personality factors in determining the way people place themselves along the socalled “computing technology continuum of perspective” (CP; Johnson et al. 2001).
For instance, Locus of Control measures whether causal attribution (Heider 1957) for
one’s behavior or beliefs is made to oneself or to external events or circumstances.
People who feel they are the source or cause of their own attitudes and behaviors
(internal LoC), tend to see the computer as a tool that they can control and use
to extend their capabilities (the so-called locally simplex perspective in the CP; see
Johnson et al. 2006; Falaleeva and Johnson 2002; Marakas et al. 2000). On the other
hand, those who attribute their own behavior or attitudes to external factors (external
LoC) are much more prone to regard computers as an autonomous, social entity with
which they are forced to interact (the so-called globally complex perspective).

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

35

The personality trait of neuroticism (and its opposite, emotional stability), too,
has been shown to affect the CP, with more neurotic (less emotionally stable) people
being more sensitive to the social nature of computing technologies, hence prompter
to a globally complex perspective (Johnson et al. 2006).
Despite their importance, the specific import of these, and similar, findings on the
acceptance of specific computing technologies (or classes thereof), or on the choice
between alternative technologies, is not a straightforward matter. Consider adaptive
technologies: they are proactive, monitoring and appropriately reacting to user preferences and behavior, while requiring that s/he delegate to technology much of the
control of the interaction. In other words, plenty of social/agentive traits that have
been extensively studied by CASA theorists. The CASA theory predicts that people
with an external LoC or a lower emotional stability will be more sensitive to those
aspects than people with a more internal orientation and/or a higher emotional stability. Still, these predictions are not directly informative about the specific ways in which
acceptability of adaptive technologies is affected by the relevant trait. For example,
will externally oriented people accept adaptivity more or less than internally oriented
ones? They are not informative about the kind of preferences that can be manifested
when comparing adaptive and non-adaptive technologies: for example, will more neurotic people prefer adaptive systems over non-adaptive ones? Nor can they directly
contribute to the debate about the opportunity of letting people feel in control of the
interaction (Shneiderman 1998; Norman 1998; Wexelblat and Maes 1997; Jameson
and Schwarzkopf 2002), especially in view of Kay’s (2001) observations discussed
above. For this to be possible, we need a more direct understanding of the personality
constellations that are more sensitive to or require a greater feeling of control.
This study takes the first steps in that direction by (a) considering the hypothesis
that some personality traits (LoC, neuroticism/emotional stability, conscientiousness
and creativity, see below) affect people’s perception of adaptive technologies, and
(b) investigating the way such an effect, if any, unfolds.
In practical terms, we define causal attribution operationally by means of LoC scale
which measures to what degree subjects locate internally or externally the control over
their own beliefs and actions. A high internal value corresponds to the thought that
the subject him/herself is the controller; an external LoC, in turn, signals that external
events are seen as substantially independent from the subject’s influence, and capable
of determining the subject’s beliefs and behavior.
Neuroticism (and its opposite, emotional stability) is a key ingredient of many factor-based models, which organize personality into underlying dimensions or factors.
Among these, the Big Five model has gained much popularity (McCrae and John
1992; Howard 1994; De Raad 2000; Perugini and Di Blas 2002; Wiggins 1996). In one
of its most used versions (Costa and McCrae 1992; McCrae and John 1992) the Big
Five posits the following five factors:
•
•
•

Extraversion: This refers to the quantity and intensity of one’s interpersonal
reactions, sociability and emotional expressiveness.
Agreeableness: This reflects individual differences with respect to cooperation and
social harmony. It includes the quality of compassion, altruism, trust,
modesty, pro-social attitudes or antagonism in one’s interpersonal interactions.
Conscientiousness: This relates to the way we control and direct our impulses. It
includes such traits as orderliness, dutifulness, achievement striving, etc.

36

•

•

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

Emotional Stability: This refers to the way we react emotionally in response to
external stimuli. At one extreme, it covers negative emotions such as anxiety, sadness and irritability. At the other, we find people who are less easily upset and less
emotionally reactive (neuroticism).
Creativity: This consists of openness to, and proactive seeking and appreciation of
new experiences.

The Big Five includes a factor (conscientiousness) that addresses an important
facet of the notion of control that is not (directly) covered by the LoC. Whereas the
latter targets (an aspect of) causal attribution (where the individual thinks that control over his/her actions/beliefs is located), conscientiousness focuses on the degree
of control exercised over one’s impulses and the way this interacts/interferes with the
pursuance of one’s goals and with task accomplishment. We expect that besides LoC,
this trait too affects acceptance of a technology that, as with adaptivity, purports to
understand user preferences for supporting the accomplishment of his/her goals.
Other traits that can be relevant to our attempt at characterizing the interplay
between acceptance of adaptive technology and personality are those relating to
innovativeness. For instance, Agarwal and Prasad (1998) have studied personal innovativeness in the domain of information technology (PIIT); this trait reflects the willingness to try out new technologies, and has been shown to play an important, though
indirect, role in affecting people’s intention to use them (Agarwal and Karahanna
2000). PIIT is a more specific version of the Big Five’s creativity, which addresses general openness to new experiences. Since no Italian version of the instrument proposed
by Agarwal and Prasad was available, we maintained the broader Big Five factor.
The remaining two Big Five factors, extraversion and agreeableness, are
characterized by facets such as friendliness, gregariousness, assertiveness, activity
level, excitement seeking, and cheerfulness and trust, morality, altruism, cooperation,
modesty, and sympathy, respectively. As far as we know, very few studies have addressed the effects of these two factors on the perception of computing technology. For
example, extraversion was found to positively correlate with low levels of computer
anxiety and anticipatory stress (Giannoutsos 2004). No relevant researches could be
found that involved agreeableness. Lacking evidence to the contrary, we hypothesize
that these two traits do not affect the attitudes towards adaptivity.
2.2 Attitudes
Acceptance of a given object, idea, concept, event, etc., relates to the notion of
attitude as used in social psychology: “an individual’s disposition to react with a
certain degree of favorableness or unfavorableness to an object or behavior” (Ajzen 1993). Attitudinal studies have sometimes been applied to the investigation of
technology acceptance, as in (Alpert et al. 2003) where user attitudes regarding adaptation in e-commerce web sites are investigated. In that work, a mixture of simulation
and working prototypes were used to present stimuli concerning the 13 adaptivity
features identified by the authors as relevant in the e-commerce scenario.
In our case, we could not maintain the same set-up as Alpert et al. We wanted, in
fact, to reach a degree of abstraction from implementation details sufficient for our
findings to (hopefully) be generalizable to an as wide as possible class of adaptive systems. In particular, it seemed important that the subjects not interact with any form
of an actual system. Many attitudinal studies can easily avoid exposing subjects to

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

37

any realization or instance of the object (or other) the measured attitudes are about,
under the reasonable assumption that subjects already have some kind of beliefs,
hence attitudes, towards it. This is the case of classical studies about attitudes towards
race, abortion, political and social matters of various kinds, and also of the many works
(some of which are cited above) that have considered attitudes towards the World
Wide Web. The acquaintance with the relevant object that supports the attitude can
be very indirect—e.g., gathered through the media, or talks with friends—but still be
enough for the target (the attitudes) to be there.
Clearly, for our study we could not rely on any form of direct or indirect acquaintance with adaptivity: this is a new, emerging technology and no system built along
such lines is available to the wide public; hence, no one but specialists can be expected
to have any attitudes at all towards it.
To resolve this tension between the quest for generality, which prevented us from
having subjects interact with a specific instantiation of the technology, and the absence
of spontaneous attitudes towards adaptivity, we decided to elicit attitudes by showing
our subjects stimulus situations (in the form of video clips) where a very stylized agent
was portrayed while interacting with two realizations (an adaptive and a non-adaptive
one) of an audio–video guide, see section 4.2. The idea is that the observation of the
video clips is enough for the subjects to form attitudes towards the shown technology.
Moreover, as we will see below, since only the details of the technology that were
relevant to our study were shown to the subject, the attitudes so formed should not
reflect (or would do so to a negligible extent) implementation details, but only general beliefs about adaptivity. Finally, the stimuli were conceived so as to prevent the
subject from identifying themselves to the agent, avoiding that their replies reflect
their perception of the agent’s attitudes rather than their own.
Support for the idea that the observation of the video clips is enough for the
subjects to form the relevant attitudes comes from the framework of vicarious learning (Bandura 1977), a process by which we learn and form beliefs about, hence
attitudes towards, a given object and/or behavior by observing other people acting
on the object or executing the relevant behavior. Closely related notions are that
of “vicarious experience” that Lester and Brown (2004) proved to be a determinant
of computer self-efficacy; and of ‘vicarious usability’, whereby a user forms beliefs
about the usability of a system by observing other users, as discussed by Mayes and
Fowler (1999). These works show that the observation of other people’s (and fictional
agents’) behavior induces beliefs and attitudes towards the relevant objects, and that
those beliefs and attitudes can be articulated enough to cover areas such as usability,
perceived usefulness, and, we argue, technology acceptability.
The proposed approach has some resemblance to techniques for early user interface evaluation (Preece et al. 2002), especially those where subjects are asked to
express their liking/disliking of simulations or mock-ups of systems, even pen-andpaper ones, and the experimenter provides them with (verbal or other) descriptions
of how the functionalities are expected to unfold. It has been shown (Nielsen 1990;
Virzi et al. 1996) that these kinds of studies permit detection of most of the usability
problems of a system.
This and related procedures for early usability studies do not follow a ‘vicarious-X’
paradigm (subjects are not exposed to the behavior of real or fictional agents). Moreover, they all target actual systems, whereas we aim to investigate adaptivity features
that are as general as possible. Nevertheless, they share with our approach the aim of
eliciting (indirect) experience in the subjects by investigating the ensuing beliefs and

38

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

attitudes. In a way, our use of video-clips where subjects are shown agents interacting
with the technology extends these techniques, while availing of vicarious learning as
a theoretical framework.
A natural issue that arises when considering the attitude of people towards technology concerns their relationships with people’s actual behavior. Quite generally,
attitudes are seen as important determinants of behavior; hence, by gaining insights
about attitudes towards a given object, one hopes to be in a better position to forecast (or otherwise understand) actual behavior involving that object. In our case, by
studying the attitudes towards dimensions of adaptivity, it should be easier to forecast
and understand the behavior of people using actual adaptive systems.
The attitude–behavior relationship is a complex one, though. For instance, after
reviewing correlation studies, Wicker (1969) skeptically dismisses the idea that attitudes are good predictors of behavior: “taken as whole, these studies suggest that it
is considerably more likely that attitudes will be unrelated or only slightly related to
overt behaviors than that attitudes will be closely related to actions”. But his skepticism can be resisted. As remarked by Ajzen (1993), the attitude–behavior relationship
can well be indirect, with many intervening or ‘mediating’ factors that make the search
for direct relationships harder or even useless. Moreover, methodological faults can
at least partially explain the failure to observe attitude–behavior relationships. The
investigation needs to be conducted in such a way as to respect the basic compatibility
between the target, action, context and time elements addressed in the attitudinal
study and those addressed in the behavioral ones. Once these methodological caveats are observed, evidence of statistically significant attitude–behavior relationships
starts emerging (Ajzen 1993).1
We acknowledge the importance of the attitude–behavior relationship, and accept
the conclusions above. Still, this study does not attempt to address if and how attitudes towards adaptivity we investigated can be related to actual behaviors with
actual systems. This is of the utmost interest, but has to await further studies. Here, we
simply mean to contribute toward modeling people’s attitudes towards adaptivity in
audio–video guides, a goal that can be pursued independently of the attitude–behavior
relation.
Before concluding, notice that in this case, as in others, simple figures concerning
favorableness or unfavorableness towards a given dimension of adaptivity might not
be very informative. Knowing that the mean score for one of them is, e.g., 4 on a 1–5
Likert scale does not tell us much, unless we can compare this value to some reference. The obvious reference in our case is the set of attitudes towards non-adaptive
systems. Such a control condition was realized by means of video clips identical to
those introduced above, but presenting our subjects with the stylized visitor using a
traditional, menu-based, system, see Sect. 3 and Sect. 4.2 for details.
In conclusion, the present study attempts to model subjects’ attitudes towards
(as much as possible) abstract dimensions of adaptivity for museum video-guides,
1 This discussion extend only partially to models that, like the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM;
Davis 1989, 1993), target behavior through the mediation of the attitudinal dimension of ‘intention to
use’ the relevant technology; the latter, in turn, is explained by further attitudinal/belief variables such
as perceived usefulness and perceived easy of use. The fact that often behavior is measured in terms of
self-reported frequency of use, or other coarse-grained variables, makes the whole issue of behavior
measurement, and the search for relationships with attitudinal/belief related variables, easier. Still, in
many studies (including those quoted above) the strength of the relationship between the behavioral
and the attitudinal (intention to use) variable is not very high, though statistically significant.

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

39

trying to avoid mixing them with behavior-related issues. The observed attitudes are
systematically related to personality traits (the LoC and the Big Five traits) which
are expected to affect the acceptance/rejection of the adaptivity dimensions. Besides
testing these expectations, we also try to characterize the way these effects unfold.

3 Dimensions of adaptivity
Adaptivity or personalization refers to the capability of a system to (acquire and)
maintain a model of some characteristics of its users in order to provide them with
information in a way that best suites their needs (Negroponte 1995; Brusilovsky and
Maybury 2002). In this work, we focus on that particular type of adaptation that
consists in tailoring information presentation (Jameson 2003).
In discussing adaptation in web-based hypermedia, Brusilovsky (2001) distinguished between content adaptation, i.e., modifications in the content of the web
pages, from adaptation of link structure. In our study, we investigate multimedia presentations, delivered on a PDA, that describe artworks. What we call a “presentation”
is a multimedia equivalent to a web page. Yet a presentation typically does not contain
text, but rather a verbal comment on a visual animation of parts of the artwork (see
Alfaro et al. 2004, and Rocchi and Zancanaro 2004 for more details).
Our adaptive presentations are structured around four dimensions: location awareness (henceforth Location), follow-ups (henceforth FU), content adaptation with
respect to user interests (Interest), and content adaptation with respect to history of
interaction (History). Location awareness refers to the capability of the system to
automatically start a presentation whenever the user approaches a relevant object.
The FU dimension consists of the automatic selection of additional material. Interest and History address the addition of more details about a given topic, and the
automatic construction of comparisons and cross-references, respectively.
Location adaptation has been applied in many domains including wireless advertising (Hristiva and Ohare 2004), mobile information retrieval from centralized information systems (Sharifi et al. 2004), recommendation systems such as location-based
services for recommending a specific store, restaurant or hotel (Butz 2004), navigation systems combining different technologies to determine the user’s location and
adapting the user interface to diverse user contexts (Baus et al. 2002; Kruger et al.
2004), and in mobile adaptive tourist guides (Cheverst et al. 2000; Oppermann and
Specht 2000).
Usually, location adaptation is combined with other adaptive dimensions such as
content adaptation. For example, in the domain of adaptive tourist guides, Gena and
Torre (2004) evaluated MastroCARONTE, an adaptive system which provides tourist information onboard cars. MastroCARONTE personalizes tourism suggestions
regarding hotels, restaurants, and places of interest, adapts their presentation, and
modifies its own behavior according to a model of the user (based on interest and
capabilities) and a model of the context of interaction (e.g., time, location, and driving
conditions). The HyperAudio project (Petrelli et al. 1999) and the PEACH project
(Rocchi and Zancanaro 2004) combined Location with content adaptation, whereby
the content of the presentation changes according to the visitor model inferred by the
system. Content adaptation was performed both with respect to the visitor’s inferred
interests and with respect to the visitor’s actual movements in the museum. Adaptation with respect to the visitor’s interests included adding more details on a specific

40

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

topic; adaptation with respect to actual movements mainly consisted of comparisons
with exhibits already seen, or suggestions to move to nearby exhibits.
In our case, visitor location is used to automatically trigger a presentation for the
relevant exhibit as well as to contextualize the presentation (for example, by means
of appropriate referring expressions such as “in front of you”).
The FU dimension was initially investigated in the context of the ILEX project
(Intelligent Labeling Explorer; Hitzeman et al. 1997; Oberlander et al. 1997). This
system aimed to provide intelligent labels for the description of the jewel collection
available on a museum’s Web site. It used natural language generation techniques, to
provide descriptions that took into consideration both the level of knowledge of the
user and the history of the interaction. Web pages for each object in the museum’s
collection were generated as the visitor navigated around the system’s Web site. In our
case, the visitor was allowed to express his/her interest in the current presentation; the
system would then present more or less material according to the visitors’ expression
of interest (see Goren-Bar et al. 2005b).
Interest and History refer to the possibility of changing the content to reflect actual
visitor interests (inferred interests and not explicitly stated ones, as with FU) and what
s/he has actually seen. These two dimensions mainly concern linguistic adjustments
and comparisons with exhibits that have already been seen, and suggestions as to what
might be visited next. These types of content adaptation were initially investigated in
the context of ILEX and HyperAudio.
In our study, the presentations were meant as stimulus situations. They consisted
of simulations of the adaptive and the non-adaptive systems as used by an idealized
user (our fictional character, see below) and presented to the subjects on a computer
screen. The simulations were to a certain extent idealized, and purposely so, for the
goal was to detect and assess attitudes towards adaptivity dimensions, abstracting away
as much as possible from concrete realizations. However, the description of an actual
system that implements all the four dimensions can be found in (Rocchi et al. 2004).

4 The study
4.1 Objectives
Our study aimed to comparatively assess the attitudes towards the four adaptivity
dimensions, through two simulated video museum guides, an adaptive (AD) and a
non-adaptive (NAD) one.
The main expectations were that (a) subjects would prefer the adaptive video guide
over the non adaptive one in the four dimensions; (b) subjects would have an overall
preference towards the adaptive video guide; (c) subject attitudes towards adaptivity would be affected by their personality traits, in particular those relating to the
control issue.
4.2 Design
The design was a crossover within study where each participant was exposed to both
versions of the system. Half of the visitors started with AD and the other half with
NAD. Forty (40) subjects participated in this study, 28 females and 12 males. Most of
the subjects were students in psychology at the University of Trento, Italy. The rest

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

41

were students in humanities or social sciences departments. Most of the students were
in their twenties, with an average age of 25.1 and SD = 5.76.
4.3 Material
For each adaptivity dimension, two videos based on Macromedia Flash presentations
were prepared, one illustrating the AD system, and the other the NAD one.
On the right side, each video featured an animated character moving in Torre
Aquila, a room in the Castello del Buonconsiglio (Trento) whose four walls are
decorated in the upper part with a cycle of frescos illustrating the months of year.
The character was kept as simple as possible, it was shown at a distance (from high
above the ground). To avoid any possible influence of the character’s appearance on
the subject, no gender, age-related characteristics, or facial expressions were visible
to the subjects.
The left side of each video featured a PDA showing the actions performed by the
fictional character. The AD system consisted of a simple interface with just two buttons, one to stop the current presentation and the other to request more information
on a given topic. The NAD video presented a standard, menu based interface which
allowed selection of a presentation for each fresco. Every action (selection, clicking,
stopping, etc.) was shown as performed by a pencil (operated by the character).
In designing these videos, we stressed the contrast between a system to which the
human delegates the initiative (AD) and a system that delegates the initiative to the
human, letting the user to be in control (NAD).
In the video illustrating the AD system for Location, the presentation automatically
starts when the character approaches a fresco, while in the NAD version for the same
dimension, a pencil is shown as it selects the appropriate presentation from the menu.
For the adaptive FU dimension, the fictional character pressed a “wow” button
when the system—while describing the January fresco—was mentioning the Castel
Stenico. There is no immediate reaction to the “wow” button other than the visual
effect of its pressure but the system automatically starts a presentation that elaborates
on that topic just after the completion of the current presentation. In the NAD condition, after the presentation about the January fresco, the system just displays the list
of the other available presentations and the fictional character selects the one about
Castel Stenico.
In the videos illustrating the two dimensions of Interest and History, the NAD
versions are pretty similar to the corresponding AD with the difference that in the
latter contain cross-referencing to details that the fictional character has already seen.
All the videos were non-interactive; that is, the subjects could not choose or suggest any actions for the character to execute. Subjects were simply asked to watch
the videos and then express their attitudes toward what they had seen. The duration
of each video was around 1 min. Figures 1 and 2 illustrate a snapshot of one of the
non-adaptive and adaptive videos used respectively. All the videos are accessible at
http://peach.itc.it/attitudinalstudy05/
Regarding user modeling, in our study we assumed the basic functionalities of tracking user movements and the information already presented, and a simple
ontology of the domain. The way user interest is initialized is not relevant for the
study; all that our subjects needed to know was that the adaptive system is aware
of the user’s interests. For an example of a prototype of a system similar to the one
illustrated in the videos, see Goren-Bar et al. (2005b).

42

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

Fig. 1 A snapshot of one of the non-adaptive videos used in the study

Fig. 2 A snapshot of one of the adaptive videos used in the study

4.4 Procedure
Each session was divided into three parts: the pre-test, the actual test, and the post-test.
The participants were tested individually.
During the pre-test, the participant completed a questionnaire on his/her computer literacy, familiarity with the most common museum technologies, frequency of
museum visits, and knowledge of the Torre Aquila. They also filled two personality
questionnaires: the Big Five Marker Scales (BFMS) for Italian (Perugini and Di Blas
2002) and the Italian version (Farma and Cortinovis 2000) of Craig’s Locus of Control
of Behavior (LCB) scale (Craig et al. 1984).
At the beginning of the test phase, the experimenter informed the subject about the
study and explained the differences between the two guides. A single subject participated in each session of the experiment. In order to reduce the possibility of biasing
the subjects, a very detailed protocol was used (see Appendix A). This protocol was
assessed in a pilot study with 10 subjects.

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

43

The following procedures were then carried out for each of the four adaptivity
dimensions:
•
•
•

The experimenter first explained the relevant dimension, and introduced the two
video clips.
The subject watched two presentations (AD and NAD) (the order being
randomized).
At the end of the second video, the subject (a) indicated which system s/he
preferred, (b) indicated on a 1–5 Likert scale how much they liked them (1 = I did
not like it at all, 5 = I liked it very much). Care was taken that the subjects’ scores
were consistent with the preference expressed at step (a) by asking first to score
the system that the subject preferred the most and then the other. (c) The subject
was asked to explain the reasons for his/her preferences, providing pros and cons
for each system.

Once all dimensions were addressed, subjects were asked which system they preferred overall (Global Preference). The videos for the different dimensions were not
randomized, given that they had a natural order.
The post-test phase was meant to assess the subjects’ attitudes towards adaptivity by
abstracting even more than before from any specific realization. They had to (a) order
the four basic dimensions according to their importance; (b) choose AD between
NAD again, this time considering optimal realizations of the relevant functionalities.

5 Results
5.1 Descriptive features of the sample
As stated before, the average age of our sample was 25.1 years (sd = 5.76). The means
and standard deviations for the raw scores at the BFMS are reproduced in Table 1
and compared with those of the population, as reported by Perugini and Di Blas
(2002). As can be seen, they are largely mutually consistent. Finally, the mean value
for the LoC is 25.1 (sd = 9.9), again consistent with the population mean 27 (sd = 9.2)
reported by Farma and Cortinovis (2000).
Table 2 reports the correlations (Pearson coefficient) between the various
personality dimensions we use. In our sample there is a significant positive relationship
between extraversion and creativity, and conscientiousness and stability. These results
are consistent with those reported in the literature about the Big Five by, e.g., Digman
(1997), John and Srivastava (1999) and Becker (2002). The Locus of Control is inversely related to conscientiousness and stability, meaning that people with a higher
internal orientation (lower scores on the LoC) tend to be high on conscientiousness
(strong control over one’s impulses) and on emotional stability (conversely, low on
neuroticism).
In the following, we use T-standard scores (mean = 50, sd = 10) for BFMS and
LoC. The BFMS’s T-scores were computed from orthogonalised scores, according to
the procedure suggested in Perugini and Di Blas (2002), using z-scores based on the
population means and standard deviations reported in Table 1. The orthogonalized
scores directly refer to the underlying factor-analytic latent variables; they are more
reliable measures of personality traits targeted by the BFMS, which are also expected
to have zero cross-correlations.

44

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

Table 1 Means and SDs for the BFMS
Males

Females
>25

25<

>25

25<

mean

sd

mean

sd

mean

sd

mean

sd

Sample
Extraversion
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Stability
Creativity

43.3
50.1
42.1
40.4
41.4

7.9
6.5
8.3
5.3
11

42.6
47.8
42.4
36.8
51

11.9
8.9
7.3
5.1
5.4

45.6
54
48.1
35.9
47.9

13.5
6.2
10.1
4.6
6.9

47.8
50.8
41.6
37
47.6

10.2
8.4
7.4
8.4
5.6

Population
Extraversion
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Stability
Creativity

43.2
49.1
42.5
39.5
50.1

10
8.7
10.7
9.1
7.1

44.8
50.9
49.3
39.8
48.7

10.4
7.7
9.2
9
7.6

45.2
52.6
44.5
33.2
49.3

12.3
7.5
10.9
8.8
7.7

44.7
54.4
50.2
36.3
48

10.9
7.7
9.7
9.7
8.6

Table 2 Correlations between the personality indices

Extraversion
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Stability
Creativity
Locus_of_Control

Extra

Agree

Consc

Stab

Crea

LoC

1

0.135
1

−0.280
0.182
1

−0.076
0.083
0.333*
1

0.396*
0.078
−0.146
−0.168
1

0.122
0.055
−0.398*
−0.356*
0.094
1

∗ p < 0.05

Concerning computer literacy (CL), we computed the average score for each subject on the relevant items of the questionnaire, obtaining a summary score between 1
(= completely computer-illiterate) to 5 (= good computer literacy). The same procedure was applied to ‘familiarity with museum technologies’ (FMT). The sample mean
values were 3.69 (sd = 0.76) and 2.82 (sd = 0.83) for CL and FMT, respectively.
To complete the descriptive characterization of our sample, we analyzed the relationships between the personality traits on the one hand, and CL and FMT on the
other, by running two regression analyses with CL and FMT as dependent variables, and the personality traits (BFMS + LoC) as independent ones. Table 3 presents
the results for the most economical fitting models (backward elimination); only the
regression variables that enter in the two most economical models are reported.
In our sample, computer literacy is inversely related to extraversion and creativity,
and directly related to conscientiousness; the other personality traits are ineffective.
The same relationships hold for the familiarity with museum technologies, with the
exception of conscientiousness that is now ineffective.
5.2 The four basic dimensions
Table 4 reports the counts of the preferences for each system, on each dimension,
together with the average score assigned to the two systems. The last two kinds of

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62
Table 3 Regression analysis
for computer literacy (CL) and
familiarity with museum
technology (FMT)

∗ p < 0.05; ∗∗ p < 0.01

45
Stand. coeff

0th order corr

CL
Extraversion
Conscientiousness
Creativity

−0.360*
0.407**
−0.402*

−0.180
0.517
−0.244

FMT
Extraversion
Creativity

−0.490*
−0.434*

−0.231
−0.141

Table 4 Preference counts, mean score and standard deviations for the two simulated conditions on
the adaptive dimensions
Location*

Interest

FU

History*

Global

NAD

freq
mean score
SD

27
4.05
0.85

25
3.81
0.98

15
3.53
1.04

3
2.98
1.02

23
–
–

AD

freq
mean score
SD

13
3.58
0.91

15
3.69
1.1

25
3.98
1.04

37
4.52
0.67

17
–
–

∗ (p < 0.05)

data are not available for Global, since we did not ask our subject to score the two
systems at the global level.
The choices on the five dimension are different (Cochran test for related samples:
Q = 43.022, df = 4, p < 0.01), showing that at least some dimensions elicit different
responses from our subjects. Starting from this, we performed statistical analysis on
each dimension. Statistically significant differences between AD and NAD choices
could be found only for Location (exact probabilities on binomial test, p < 0.05;
power = 0.64 with α = 0.05 and power = 0.76 with α = 0.1) and History (exact probabilities on binomial test, p < 0.001; power > 0.95 with α = 0.05). Hence, our subjects
tend to prefer NAD on Location and AD on History. The result for Location should
be taken with some caution given the low power attained, but this is in accordance with
observations in Jameson and Schwarzkopf (2002). The second result is much more
robust: interestingly, perceiving and appreciating content adaptation with respect to
the history of the presentations is a difficult task, for it involves a typical holistic
dimension; however, it seems that subjects managed to do so, with a quite uniform
preference for AD over NAD.
Besides knowing about the preferences of our subjects, we also wanted to be
informed about the strength of the choice—that is, how strongly the subjects preferred one alternative over the other. We used the absolute value of the difference
between the scores assigned to each alternative version as a measure of the strength
of the preferences on a given dimension. The idea is that the greater the difference
between the score assigned to AD and NAD, the greater the determinacy of the
subjects in making their choices. Table 5 reports the mean values with their standard
deviations.
Strength scores were analyzed through a repeated measure multivariate analysis of
variance, using the four adaptivity dimensions plus ‘global’ as a within factor (that is,

46

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

Table 5 Mean values and SD for the strength of the choices

Mean
SD

Location

Interest

FU

History

Global

1.335
0.626

1.613
0.828

1.628
0.915

1.868
0.917

1.170
0.645

the dimensions were treated as five different occasions on which subjects performed
the same task). A significant effect was found (Willk’s Lambda = 0.513, F = 8.539,
Hypothesis df = 4, error df = 36, p < 0.0001, observed power = 0.997), showing that
the strength of the preference is affected by the dimension being assessed. Pairwise
comparisons between the averages (with Bonferroni adjustment for multiple comparisons to a global p < 0.05) showed that our subjects were significantly more
determined in their choices for History than for Location, and much less determined
on Global than on all the other dimensions with the exception of Location. A multivariate ANOVA with the type of choice (AD or NAD) as a second factor failed to
show any effect of it, or interaction with the five dimensions. Hence, the strength of
the preference was related to the adaptivity dimension, but not to the specific choice
(AD or NAD) made.
In conclusion, our sample indicated a preference for the NAD version on Location,
and for the AD version on History. Choice strength differed on these two dimensions,
with subjects more determined in their choosing AD on History, but much less so
when preferring NAD on Location. Finally, Global had the subject less determined
in their choices with respect to most of the other dimensions, a datum that could be
related to the difficulty of providing judgments on whole adaptive and non-adaptive
systems starting from the single dimensions.

5.2.1 Effect of descriptive variables
No effect of gender on any relevant adaptivity dimension was detected (Pearson’s
chi-square, Fisher exact test, Cochran’s Mantel–Haenszel’s test). Similarly, neither
computer literacy nor the familiarity with the technology in the museums had any
effect on any variable, as tested through logistic regression (Agresti 2002).

5.2.2 Effect of personality traits
The effect of personality traits (BFMS and LoC) was tested through both discriminant
analysis and logistic regression. The results were always concordant, and are discussed
with reference to logistic regression; see Agresti (2002) for details. For each dependent variable (preference on Location, Interest, FU, History and Global), we ran a
separate logistic regression with the five dimensions of BFMS plus the LoC as independent variables treated as covariates. For each dependent variable, the fitting of the
model was first measured through the scaled deviance G2 (M0|M1), where M0 refers
to the simplest, constant model (only intercept) and M1 to the full regression model.
Only those models where the scaled deviance test was significant at a level p < 0.05
were retained; in particular, the model for History was discarded and not considered
any further. The main effects of each independent variable were tested by means of
the G2 (M0|M1) statistics, with M1 referring now to the full fitted regression model,

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

47

Table 6 Summary of regression analyses results
BFMS
Extravers.
Location
Interest

Agreeabl.

Conscien.

Stability

G2 = 3.885*
β = −0.098*
G2 = 6.141*
β = −0.142*

G2 = 8.837**
β = 0.163

Creativity

LoC

FU
Global

G2 = 6.276*
β = −0.126*

G2 = 7.476**
β = −0.136*

∗ p < 0.05; ∗∗ p < 0.01

and M0 to the reduced model obtained from it by omitting the variable under study.
This procedure provides an estimate of the contribution of the relevant independent
variable to the overall variation of the dependent one. When significant effects were
detected, the corresponding parameters in the regression model informed about the
way the effect unfolds, in terms of AD to NAD odds. See Agresti (2002) for further
details.
Table 6 reports the results for the significant G2 tests, along with the values of the
regression parameters.
Conscientiousness appears to affect Location, Interest and Global. The sign of the
parameters suggests that in all cases, higher values of conscientiousness increase the
odds for NAD. Hence, more conscientious people tend to prefer NAD over the AD
on Location, Interest, and at a Global level. Stability increases the odds for AD on
Interest, so that more emotionally stable people seem to prefer the AD version. The
other BFMS traits did not produce any significant effect on any dimensions. Finally,
the Locus of Control has an effect on Global, with people having a more external
(higher score) LoC favoring the NAD over the AD.
In summary, the dimensions that seem most sensitive to personality traits are Location, Interest and Global. The most effective BFMS traits are conscientiousness, and
stability. The former strengthens the tendency of subjects to prefer NAD (on Location, Interest and Global); the second correlates with a tendency to prefer AD (on
Interest). Creativity, which we consider as subsuming the more specific trait of personal innovativeness (PIIT), has no effect on AD vs. NAD preferences. Finally, higher
LoC (external locus of control) affects the odds in favor of NAD on Global.
5.2.3 Characterizing the subjects over the dimensions
We investigate now whether it is possible to find any interesting partition of our sample which could help us better understand the overall disposition towards AD versus
NAD, and confirm, by means of different statistical analyses, the results discussed in
the previous section.
A two-step cluster analysis was run; the variables were the preferences expressed
along the various dimensions by our subjects. (We excluded History because almost all
our subjects—37 out of 40, see Table 2—chose AD over NAD.) The analysis singled
out three groups, see Table 7.

48

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

Table 7 Groups from cluster analysis—bold figures correspond to dimensions that significantly
contribute to the relevant group
Group1

Location
Interest
FU
Global

Group2

Group3

AD

NAD

AD

NAD

AD

NAD

13
12
13
10

4
5
4
7

–
–
12
7

12
12
–
5

–
3
–
–

11
8
11
11

Personality profiles of cluster groups
60

group1
50

group2
group3

Lo
C

cr
ea
t iv
it y

lity
st
ab
i

co
ns
cie
nt
io
us
ne
ss

n
ex
tr a
ve
rs
io

ag
re
ab
le
ne
ss

40

Fig. 3 Personality Profiles for the cluster groups

We attempted to characterize the three groups in two ways: first of all, by studying
if and how each of them differs from the whole sample in the preferences expressed
along the various dimension; secondly, by studying each group’s personality profile.
The first goal was pursued by means of a series of χ 2 tests to assess the contribution of each dimension to cluster formation; Bonferroni adjustment for multiple
comparison to a global level of p < 0.05 was applied. The results (see the bold figures
in Table 7) were that Group 1 had a stronger tendency than the whole sample to favor
AD on Location and Interest, and Group 2 a stronger tendency to choose NAD on
Interest and AD on FU; finally, Group 3 included people who more neatly prefer
NAD on Global and FU.
The personality profiles of the three groups are reported in Fig. 3. They are based
on the mean values for each personality trait, and can be compared to the whole
sample profile, represented by the horizontal straight line intersecting the Y-axis at
the value of 50.
A multivariate ANOVA with the cluster groups as a factor, and the BFMS plus
LoC as dependent variables showed a significant effect of the group variable (Willk’s
lambda = 0.492, F = 2.273, Hyp-df = 12, error-df = 64, p < 0.05, observed power =
0.922), with an effect on conscientiousness (F = 3.296, df1 = 2, df2 = 37, p < 0.05),
stability (F = 3.28, df1 = 2, df2 = 37, p < 0.05) and LoC (F = 5.769, df1 = 2,
df2 = 37, p < 0.01). The analysis of contrasts revealed that: the mean value of conscientiousness for Group 1 is lower than that of sample mean (p < 0.05), whereas the
corresponding value for Group 2 is higher (p < 0.05); the value of stability is lower
in Group 3 than in the whole sample (p < 0.05); the mean value of LoC is lower in

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62
Table 8 Characterization of
the three groups with respect
to sample means

Group 1
Group 2
Group 3

49
Conscientiousness

Stability

LoC

Lower
Higher
Average

Average
Average
Lower

Average
Lower
Higher

Group 2, and higher in Group 3 than in the whole sample (p < 0.05). These results
are summarized in Table 8.
In conclusion, three clusters were identified. The first, Group 1, prefers AD on
Location and Interest, and has a low score on conscientiousness. The third cluster,
Group 3, stably chooses NAD, in particular on FU and Global; personality-wise, it has
a low emotional stability and a stronger external LoC. Group 2 is somehow intermediate: it prefers NAD on Interest and AD on FU, has a high score on conscientiousness
and a strong internal orientation on LoC.
These results, obtained by means of different statistical tools from those exploited
in the previous section, provide an important, even if partial, confirmation of findings
obtained therein. Limiting our discussion to converging results, we can say that conscientiousness is positively related to the NAD preference on Location and Interest;
stability is positively related to the AD preference on Interest; and, finally, people
with a more, external locus of control tend to globally favor NAD. We can, therefore,
give a first, although partial, answer to the question concerning the role of the two
control-related personality factors and of neuroticism/stability in the acceptability
of adaptivity: LoC seems to affect the way adaptivity is seen as a whole, whereas
conscientiousness and neuroticism/stability tend to influence two specific dimensions:
Location and Interest. As to the direction of the effect, the thought that the environment has a strong control on one’s actions/beliefs (external LoC), and the capability of
controlling one’s impulses are both associated with a preference for the non-adaptive
over alternative, as is neuroticism.
5.2.4 Reasons for the choices
After a subject had indicated his/her preference for one of the two systems, s/he was
asked to explain the reasons for the choice in the form of an open answer, providing as
many reasons as s/he wanted. The explanations the subjects provided were classified
into five groups:
1.
2.

3.
4.

5.

Easiness: It refers to reasons related to some kind of costs/benefits evaluation.
E.g., ‘it is simpler/easier to use/operate’;
Transparency (of the functioning): It considers the understandability of the way
the system works. E.g. ‘it is easier to understand the way it works/what you have
to do’;
Understandability and memorisability of the contents: E.g., ‘the presentations are
more understandable/easier to remember’;
Control: It refers to the perceived degree of control over the interaction the
two versions afford to the users. E.g., ‘it allows more/ a better control of the
interaction’;
Similarity to a human guide: E.g., ‘it is like a human guide’ (i.e. predictability of
system behaviour).

50

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

Table 9 Reasons for users preferences on the adaptivity dimensions
Easiness

Transparency

Understandability/
Memorisability

Control

Human Like

Location

AD
NAD

100%
19%

15%
15%

8%
15%

0%
85%

31%
0%

Interest

AD
NAD

47%
16%

0%
4%

47%
32%

0%
84%

13
0%

FU

AD
NAD

80%
47%

16%
20%

32%
60%

0%
40%

8%
0%

History

AD
NAD

57%
0%

5%
0%

81%
67%

0%
33%

14%
0%

Table 9 reports the results. As an example, the 100% figure in the cell for Location–AD–Easiness means that all the subjects who chose AD on Location mentioned
Easiness as reason for doing so, whereas the 15% figure in the cell Location–
AD–Transparency means that only 15% of those subjects mentioned ‘transparency’
as a reason for their choice. No statistical analyses were performed on those data, so
the following discussion has a more qualitative flavor.
As can be seen, ‘Control’ is never mentioned as a reason for choosing AD on
any dimensions, but it is among the main reasons for NAD preference, especially
on Location and Interest. That is, the subjects (correctly) perceive that NAD allows
for a greater control over the interaction, and this is a major reason for preferring
it over the alternative, cf. (Jameson and Schwarzkopf 2002). On the other hand, a
frequent motivation for choosing AD was its highest perceived easiness (Location
and FU), and the higher understandability of the content provided (History). Among
the remaining motivations, ‘similarity to the human guide’ does not seem to play a
relevant role. This is of some interest, for it shows that the choice between AD and
NAD was mostly based on the direct appreciation of the respective strengths and
weaknesses, and was not mediated by indirect comparisons with the human guide.
Finally, it is worth noting that more than half of the subjects who preferred NAD on
FU did so because they found that the NAD system provides more understandable
content (‘understandability and memorisability’).
In conclusion, the importance of the control issue is confirmed: those who choose
the non-adaptive version most often do so because of the greater perceived control it
provides. On the other hand, ease of use and memorizability/understandability were
the main reasons behind the choice of the adaptive system.
5.2.5 The relationship among the dimensions of adaptivity
Similarity across dimensions can be measured in terms of identical choices
(e.g., AD–AD) by means of the Cramer’s V association index. Only in two cases
were the figures significant (p < 0.05): between Location and Interest (V = 0.35)
and between FU and Global (V = 0.46). The solutions to a multidimensional (two
dimensions) scaling analysis yielded coordinates compatible with those results: Location (1.42, 0.30), Interest (1.42, 0.36), FU (−0.72, −0.55), History (−2.088, 0.47),
global (−0.03, −0.58).

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

51

Hence, our subjects tended to behave in a similar manner when expressing their
preferences on Location-Interest and FU-Global. History does not pattern with any
other dimensions. Of some interest is the low degree of similarity between Interest
and FU, showing that our subjects did not perceive the two dimensions as related,
despite their conceptual and implementation relationships.
5.3 Post-test questionnaire
The post-test questionnaire aimed to assess the subjects’ attitudes towards the dimensions of adaptivity in a more direct manner by asking them to order the dimensions
according to their importance for an ideal adaptive audio-video guide. The resulting orderings were converted into ranks on an ordinal scale from 1 to 4 (1 lower, 4
higher). Table 10 displays the results; each cell reports the percentage of times the
relevant dimension was assigned the relevant rank. The last row reports the mean
ranks. Figure 4 plots the cumulative distributions for the four dimensions.
The overall differences in ranking are statistically significant (Friedman test:
χ 2 = 12.510, df = 3, p < 0.05). Pairwise contrasts are significant for History versus FU, History versus Interest and Location versus Interest. No effect of personality
traits was found through ordinal logistic regression. Hence, History is uniformly seen
by our sample as more important than FU and Interest, and Location is felt as more
important than Interest. Finally, the distribution of the rankings for Location is relatively uniform.

Table 10 Importance rank of
the adaptivity dimensions for a
hypothetical personalised
guide

1
2
3
4
Mean rank

Location

Interest

FU

History

25%
25%
22.5%
27.5%
3.05

30%
40%
25%
5%
2.53

30%
17.5%
37.5%
15%
2.38

15%
17.5%
15%
52.5%
2.05

100

75

location
interest

50

FU
history

25

0
1

2

3

4

Fig. 4 Importance rank of the adaptivity dimensions—Cumulative distributions

52

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

Table 11 Mean values and comparisons among distributions for rankings split according to the
AD/NAD responses
Location
AD
Rank
Statistics

3.2

NAD

2.2
11.568*

Interest
AD
2.3

NAD
1.9
3.289

FU
AD
2.8

NAD

1.7
11.79*

History
AD

NAD

3.14
1.3
6.695**

∗ p < 0.01 on χ 2 test; ∗∗ p < 0.05 on Fisher’s exact test

The relationships between the importance rankings of adaptivity dimensions and
the preferences expressed for the AD or the NAD versions on each dimension were
investigated by first splitting the rankings according to the preferences. The resulting two distributions for each dimension were compared by means of the χ 2 , or the
Fisher’s exact test, depending on whether the conditions for the former (each cell
having an expected frequency not lower than 5) were met. The results are reported in
Table 11 along with the mean ranks.
In all cases except Interest, those who expressed a preference for the AD version of
the guide ranked the relevant dimension higher than those who chose NAD. Hence,
Interest is not only the lowest ranked dimension, but its low appreciation is common
both to those who chose AD and to those who chose the NAD versions.
The last question we asked subjects concerned whether they would choose AD or
NAD, in case of an optimal realization of both systems. In other words, if the systems
the subject had seen were realized in an optimal manner, with all their functionalities
optimally implemented which system would the subject use?
Most of the subjects, 31 (78%) indicated AD, and the remaining 9 (22%) NAD.
This is good news: at that point of the session, the subjects had been exposed to
the various videos and had time enough to think about the problem of adaptivity in
mobile guides. Hence, the fact that 78% of the subjects would use AD if the system
had optimal characteristics seems to reliably capture a real preference/interest for
adaptivity. On the other hand, there is a relatively large portion of people who are
not attracted by adaptivity.

6 Discussion and limitations
This work has attempted to contribute to modeling the effects of some personality
traits on the acceptance of adaptivity in audio–video guides. Our initial hypotheses
were that conscientiousness, creativity and neuroticism/emotional stability from the
BFMS, and the Locus of Control affect the acceptability of adaptive technology, when
this is compared with non-adaptive one. Moreover, we wanted to investigate the way
these effects unfold.
The hypotheses were tested by means of an observational/correlational approach.
The independent variables were not controlled for at sample-formation time, but their
values were directly measured on the sample, along with those of the dependent variables. Logistic regression and related techniques for categorical data were the major
analytic tools we exploited, treating the independent variables (BFMS and LoC) as
continuous covariates, rather than as factors, and limiting our attention to the main
effects. Interactions among independent variables were not pursued because of the

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

53

difficulty in making sense of them when they are treated as continuous covariates. This
might have limited the explanatory power of our analyses somewhat; for instance, in
no case was the rate of correct classification for our logistic regressions higher than
78–80%. Those are good values, but it is possible that the consideration of interactions
could have yielded higher figures.
The use of cluster-based analyses with the ensuing possibility of resorting to more
standard approaches (multivariate analysis of variance—MANOVA) was meant to
complement the results of the regression analyses, making the whole more robust.
Three groups were identified on the basis of the preference expressed on the various
dimensions by our subjects. The groups were then studied by analyzing how each
of them differed from the whole sample on the preferences expressed on the various dimensions, according to their personality profiles. Eventually, we retained the
results on which the two analyses agreed, the regression-based one and the cluster/
MANOVA-based one.
Whenever possible, the power of the test performed was reported. Cases of low
power occurred, as with the AD versus NAD preference on Location discussed in
Sect. 5; this can be imputed to the joint action of the intrinsic low power of the
exploited statistical test (binomial or χ 2 tests) and the size of the sample. The results
were always included in the discussion, but they need to be confirmed by other studies. As to categorical regression analysis, no accepted, standard approaches exist for
computing power (or, at least, they are not available on most common statistical packages, e.g., SPSS); this was yet another reason to complement these analyses with ones
(MANOVA) for which standard approaches to power computation are available.
Table 12 summarizes the main findings of this work.
Our sample expressed a preference for content adaptation with respect to the history of the interaction, while dismissing adaptation on the basis of location-awareness.
The delegation of the initiative to start a presentation on the basis of Location seems
to be a controversial feature, as is also shown by the low strength of the choices made,
and by the fact that, in a hypothetical adaptive system, its importance ranking has
a uniform distribution. The main reason our subjects provided for this non-positive
attitude is the lack of control. Indeed, even the subjects who chose location awareness
remarked that some more ‘control’ would be useful, e.g., in the form of a request to
the user for the permit to start the presentation.
The neat choice in favor of AD for the History-based adaptation is interesting. In
fact, this subtle and holistic feature is difficult to perceive when the subject interacts
directly with an actual system since it requires the explicit appreciation of links to
previous information. Yet the indices we have considered, including the strength of
the choice and the importance, all point towards the conclusion that subjects were able
to understand this dimension, which turned out to be the most valuable among those

Table 12 Summary of the main findings

Location
Interest
FU
History
Global

Preference

Strength

Importance

Affected by

NAD
–
–
AD
–

Low
Medium
Medium
High
Very low

Medium
Very low
Medium
High
Not relevant

Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness,Stability
–
–
LoC

54

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

considered here. The choices were motivated mainly by the greater understandability
and memorizability of the contents provided by the AD version in this case.
The two dimensions relating to user modeling (Interest and FU) have a sort of
intermediate status. Both fail to elicit clear-cut choices from our sample, and receive
low importance rankings. Moreover, despite being closely related both conceptually
and implementation-wise (the ‘wow’ button directly affects the user model; hence the
way the system adapts the presentation to the user’s interests), our subjects failed to
perceive such a relationship, and often behaved differently on these two dimensions,
cf. Sect. 5.2.5.
There are effects of personality traits on the AD/NAD choices. Two of the Big Five
factors, conscientiousness and stability, seem to affect the AD versus NAD choices,
confirming our expectations. According to the converging results from the regression and the cluster analyses, more conscientious people tend to dislike adaptivity
on Location, and on the content adaptation with respect to Interest. People who are
more emotionally stable, on the other hand, appreciate content adaptation on Interest. The locus of control, in turn, affects global judgment about AD/NAD, with more
externally-oriented people tending to praise the very idea of non-adaptive over that
of adaptive systems. As to FU, our data did not allow us to establish any significant
relationship with any personality dimension. Finally, we could not prove that creativity, as an indicator of openness to novelty, has any effect on the acceptance of adaptive
technologies.
Conscientiousness (De Raad 2000; Howard 2000; Costa and McCrae 1992) is described as being concerned with the way we control, regulate and direct our impulses,
and articulates into facets such as competence (self-efficacy), orderliness, dutifulness,
achievement-striving, self-discipline and cautiousness. People high on conscientiousness have a good control on their own impulses, are confident in their ability to accomplish things, are well organized, have a clear sense of their duties and obligations and
do not discourage easily. According to our analyses, these subjects tend to dislike
delegating the start of a presentation to the system on the basis of location-awareness,
and dislike adaptivity with respect to the user model (Interest).
Emotional stability refers to the way people react to stressful situations: emotionally stable people are at ease most of the time, usually calm and not easily upset,
free from persistent negative feelings and rapidly rebounding in time. At the other
extreme, low stability (Neuroticism) correlates with strong emotional reactions: anxiety and anger, and sense of vulnerability. According to our data, emotionally stable
subjects have a positive attitude towards content adaptation with respect to the user
model (Interest).
The Locus of Control is sensitive to where people feel the control over one’s beliefs
and actions is located. When internal, the subject feels that s/he is the controller; an
external LoC signals that the subject’s beliefs and actions are substantially independent from his/her own influence. Rotter (1966) showed that people who feel in control
of their own beliefs/actions pay more attention to the environmental features that can
orient their future behavior; are more active towards the environment; more interested in their own abilities, more worried about their own deficiencies; and try to
oppose external attempts to influence their behavior. According to our data, these
people have a general positive attitude towards adaptivity, as our results on the Global
dimension show; they do not seem to be afraid to delegate some control, probably
because they feel confident that they can always recover it. The subjects with a more

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

55

external orientation, on the other hand, seem more interested in maintaining a direct
control on the device, and praised non-adaptivity.
Most of the expectations concerning personality traits have been born out: those
relating to the issue of control broadly conceived (internal/external LoC, control over
own emotional reactions (stability) and over own impulses (conscientiousness)) do
seem to affect the way people perceive adaptive/non-adaptive technologies. The findings from studies conducted within the CASA framework (Johnson et al. 2001, 2006;
Falaleeva and Johnson 2002; Marakas et al. 2000) are both confirmed and made more
specific with respect to the topic of this work (adaptive technologies): people who are
highly sensitive to the social facets of technology because of their external LoC and/or
their neuroticism tend to reject AD, either globally (LoC) or on specific dimensions
(content adaptation on the basis of interest for low emotionally stable people), in
both cases preferring the less social, more traditional (and probably more reassuring)
NAD technology.
Finally, a high degree of control over one’s impulses (conscientiousness) positively
correlates with NAD choices on location-awareness and Interest. This finding, if confirmed by further studies, is less easy to interpret than the other two, apparently
contrasting with them. With LoC and emotional stability, in fact, it is the low-control
end of the scale (external LoC, neuroticism) that correlates with a preference for
NAD (and a high sensitivity to the social characteristics of technology), whereas with
conscientiousness it is the high-control end that favors NAD.
A possible explanation for the this contrast is of a factorial (psychometric) nature:
conscientiousness and stability, as used in the discussion, are orthogonalized factors of
the Italian version of the BFMS; as such, they represent ‘pure’ underlining personality
traits, and their correlations are (close to) zero. LoC is not part of the same factorial
structure, and maintains a significant negative correlation with both conscientiousness
(ρ = −0.4 p < 0.01) and stability (ρ = −0.036, p < 0.05). The (apparent) contradiction might be due to a common factor between LoC and stability that is disjointed
from the factors accounting for the results with conscientiousness.
Another possibility is that there is no contrast at all. As far as we know, conscientiousness has not received the same attention as LoC and neuroticism from the
CASA’s theorists, and we do not know whether, or how, it correlates with Johnson
et al.’s (2001) CP. Should it turn out that conscientiousness positively correlates with
sensitivity to the social aspects of technology, then the contradiction would disappear
in favor of the unified view that high sensitivity to the social aspects of technology
determines a preference for NAD technologies.
Be it as it may, the results discussed above are consistent with the explicit concerns
about control expressed by our subjects when motivating their choices, and with the
findings in the literature discussed in section 2. With respect to the latter, however, our
analysis provides a more articulated picture by examining the relationships between
control and personality traits, and pinpointing when and how it is detrimental for
adaptivity acceptance.
An expectation that was not borne out concerns the role of creativity, which we
hypothesized would affect acceptance of adaptive technologies. This trait describes
a dimension of cognitive style, distinguishing imaginative and creative people from
down-to-earth ones. Usually, more creative people are intellectually curious and sensitive to innovation. A more specific version of this trait, the ‘innovativeness in the
domain of information technology’ (PIIT; Agarwal and Prasad 1998), has been shown
to play an important, though indirect, role in affecting people’s intention to use

56

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

technologies (Agarwal and Karahanna 2000). As long as creativity includes and subsumes PIIT, it must be concluded that this dimension was irrelevant to the NAD/AD
choices, perhaps because both guides were seen as equal on innovation value. It should
also be recalled that, in Sect. 5.1, creativity was seen to be inversely related to familiarity with technologies; hence, it is possible that in our sample more creative people
were not of the kind sensitive to technology and innovation, possibly orienting their
intellectual curiosity towards other aspects. Whether the first or the second (or any
other) reason accounts for the absence of effects of creativity on NAD versus AD
choices can only be revealed through further studies.
The other two BFMS personality traits, extraversion and agreeableness, were, as
expected, mostly ineffective.
This study has attempted to contribute to a general model of the attitudes towards
adaptivity in video-guides. It can be seen as a weakness that we resorted to elicited
attitudes, whose relationship with ‘true’ ones is unclear. We concede that this can be a
weakness. But consider what the term ‘true attitudes’ means: the only useful sense is
that involving people living in a society where adaptive technology is available, such
that they either have accessed it, or know (indirectly) about it. We know, however,
that we are not going to have this benchmark for some time. In the meanwhile, we
can only do our best to explore the field with the means available. In these respects,
we believe that the methodology we exploited here is on no worse a footing than
others, e.g., not with respect to studies targeting the attitudes of people who have
accessed a specific, often experimental, technology, often using it on a single occasion.
As argued in Sect. 1 and 2, these studies are too bound up with the peculiarities of
the relevant piece of technology to help in generalizing towards models of attitudes
towards adaptivity.
Finally, this study has not addressed the relationships between attitudes and
behavior. As pointed out in Sect. 2, this is a complex topic, involving both subtle
theoretical and methodological issues. In our case, things are made even more difficult by the fact that we are studying a new technology. People do not have any
experience of adaptive technologies, hence they do not have any beliefs or attitudes
towards it, nor can they be asked about, e.g., frequency of use, a common measure of
actual behavior in models such as TAM (Technology Acceptance Model; Davis 1989,
1993). The first problem (beliefs/attitudes) was circumvented by exposing our subjects
to stimulus situations portraying a fictional character using the technology, trying to
maintain even indirect exposure to the implementation aspect as low as possible. As
to the second, a possibility to start addressing it consists in replicating a study like the
present one, followed by actual practice with an adaptive guide with a measurement
of actual behavior.

7 Conclusions
This study showed that personality traits selectively affect the attitudes of people
towards adaptivity, especially those relating to the notion of control. The first important consequence is that any evaluation of actual mobile guides can be systematically
biased unless the personality of the users is explicitly controlled for or taken into
account. As to the consequences of design and development, this is an entirely different topic with respect to those we have addressed here, and one that deserves much
more investigation. At present we can point at two possibilities: (a) once adaptive

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

57

audio-video guides are spread enough for users to have formed stable attitudes towards them (incorporating the effect of their personality traits), simply let users choose
between adaptive and non-adaptive guides. (b) A much more intriguing alternative is
to enable the system to quickly find out about the user’s personality traits (especially
those related to the control issue) from the very first interactions, and then let it use
this knowledge to dynamically increase or decrease user control over the relevant
dimensions of adaptivity in order to accommodate the selective effects of personality
traits. The main relevant research issue, here, is that of devising techniques for rapidly
profiling the user’s personality from just a few interactions.
As usually happens, it is not yet obvious that the results of this study will be replicated if similar tests are performed with different users groups or in slightly different
contexts. Yet we think this investigation brought some interesting empirical evidence
to the debate about personalization. We think, furthermore that the dimensions investigated are general enough to foresee that the results can be, to some extent, generalized to any situation of personalized information presentation in a mobile setting,
such as, for example, the scenario of a mobile shopping assistant (see for example,
Bohnenberger et al. 2002).
Acknowledgements This research was partially funded by the Provincia Autonoma di Trento under
the project PEACH: Personal Experience of Active Cultural Heritage http://peach.itc.it . We would
like to thank all the other researchers involved in the project and in particular Oliviero Stock, Tsvika
Kuflik and Cesare Rocchi for the fruitful discussions around the topics discussed in this paper.

Appendix A
Information sheet (translated from Italian)
The video clips you are going to see concern a hypothetical visitor during a visit to
Castello del Buonconsiglio, and more specifically, to Torre Aquila. The four walls of
the tower’s room are decorated in the upper part with frescos depicting the Cycle of
the Months.
You will be shown our hypothetical visitor in two alternative situations. In the first,
he will use a guide, call it guide1, that takes the initiative in selecting and proposing him the contents. In the other situation, he uses a guide, call it guide2, which he
explicitly tells what to do by means of menu-based systems. In both cases, the resulting
contents presented to the visitors are identical.
To emphasise some characteristics (which will be better explained later on) we
have divided the two alternative visits into four parts each. Hence, the video clips
are structured into four portions, in each of which the corresponding parts of the two
visits will be shown one after the other. For instance, during the first portion you will
see the first part of the first visit and the first part of the second visit, and so on. At
the end of each portion you will be asked some questions concerning what you have
just seen.
Both visits start with the visitor arriving in Torre Aquila’s room.
Information concerning the various portions

58

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

Location
In this first portion the two visits differ because:
•
•

In the first the system can detect the position of the visitor in the room and the
fresco he is facing, and use this information to start the presentation about that
fresco.
In the second, it is the visitor who starts the presentation about the fresco he is
facing.

In both cases, if the user does not find the presentation interesting, he can interrupt
it. At this point:
•
•

Guide1 chooses the following presentation
With guide2, it is the user who chooses the next topics.

Interest
Our visitor is particularly interested in the agricultural techniques used in the past.
•
•

Guide1 knows about the visitor’s interests, and adapts the content of the presentation to them.
With guide2, the visitor can choose the topic he is most interested in from a
structured list.

Follow-ups
In the next portion, the visitor’s interest is captured when the system mentions Castel
Stenico, made by the system, and he wants to know more about this topic.
•

•

With guide1, the visitor signals his interest for Castel Stenico by clicking the ‘wow’
button, placed on the right upper part of the display. In response, the system
assembles a presentation consisting of the material that it had already planned to
present, followed by in-depth information about Castel Stenico.
With guide2, once the presentation is finished, the visitor can choose the topic
‘Castel Stenico’ form the menu.

History
The visitor is now almost at the end of the visit. In both situations, and with both systems, he has seen the same frescos in the same order, and gathered the same amount
of information about the same topics. In this last portion:
•
•

Guide1 keeps track of the visit, and of the contents shown. When presenting the
last fresco, it uses this knowledge to emphasize the continuity and the links with
what the visitor has already seen.
With guide2, the visitor can maintain the continuity by himself, by choosing (when
he finds it appropriate) to listen again to topics concerning the previous fresco.

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

59

References
Abwod, G.D., Mynatt, E.D.: Charting past, present and future research in ubiquitous computing.
ACM Trans. Comp. Hum. Interact. 7(1), 41–57 (2000)
Agarwal, R., Karahanna, E.: Time flies when you’re having fun: cognitive absorption and beliefs about
information technology usage. MIS Q. 24(4), 665–694 (2000)
Agarwal, R., Prasad, J.: A conceptual and operational definition of personal innovativeness in the
domain of information technology. Inf. Syst. Res. 9(2), 204–215 (1998)
Agresti, A.: Categorical Data Analysis. John Wiley and Sons, New York (2002)
Ajzen, I.: Attitude theory and the attitude–behavior relation. In: Krebs, Schmidt (eds.) New Directions
in Attitude Measurment, pp. 41–57. deGruyter, Berlin (1998)
Alfaro, I., Nardon, M., Pianesi, P., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M.: Using cinematic techniques on mobile
devices for cultural tourism. Inf. Technol. Tourism 7(2), 223–230 (2004)
Alpert, S.R., Karat, J., Karat, C.-M., Brodie, C., Vergo, J.G.: User attitudes regarding a user-adaptive
eCommerce web site. User Model. User-Adap. Interact. 13(4), 373–396 (2003)
Bandura, A.: Social Learning Theory. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J (1977)
Bandura, A.: Self Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. W.H. Freeman, New York (1977)
Baus, J., Krüger, A., Wahlster, W.: A resource-adaptive mobile navigation system. In: Proceedings of
the 7th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI’02), pp. 15–22. San Francisco,
CA (2002)
Becker, P.: The four-plus-X factor model as a framework for the description of normal and disordered
personality. A pilot study. Trier Psuchol Berichte Band29, Heft 1. University of Trier (2002)
Bohnenberger, T., Jameson, A., Krueger, A., Butz, A.: Location-aware shopping assistance: evaluation of a decision-theoretic approach, pp. 159–169. In: Proceedings of Mobile-HCI-02, Pisa, Italy
(2002)
Brusilovsky, P.: Adaptive hypermedia. User Model. User Adapt. Inter. Ten Year Anniversary Issue
(Alfred Kobsa ed.) 11(1/2), 87–110 (2001)
Brusilovsky, P., Maybury, M.T.: From adaptive hypermedia to the adaptive web. Commun. ACM.
45(5), 30–33 (2002)
Brusilovsky, P., Karagiannidis, C., Sampson, D.: Layered evaluation of adaptive learning systems. Int.
J. Continuing Eng. Educ. Lifelong Learn. 14(4/5), 402–421 (2004)
Butz, A.: Between location awareness and aware locations: where to put the intelligence. Appl. Artif.
Intell. (Special Issue on AI in Mobile Systems) 18(6), 501–512 (2004)
Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Mitchell, K.: The role of adaptive hypermedia within a context-aware
tourist GUIDE. Commun. ACM (Special Issue on adaptive Web-based Systems and Adaptive
Hypermedia) 45(5), 47–51 (2002)
Chin, D.N.: Empirical evaluation of user model and user-adaptive system. User Model User-Adap.
Interact. 11(1–2), 181–194 (2001)
Cigliano, E., Monaci, S.: Multimuseum: a multichannel communication project for the National Museum of Cinema of Turin. In: Proceedings of Museum and the Web 2003. Charlotte, NC, USA
(last http://www.archimuse.com/mw2003/papers/monaci/monaci.html) (2003)
Costa, P.T., McCrae, R.R.: NEO PI-R: professional manual. Psychological Assessment Resources.
Odessa, FL (1992)
Craig, A.R., Franklin, J.A., Andrews, G.: A scale to measure locus of control of behaviour. Br. J. Med.
Psychol. 41, 397–404 (1984)
Davis, F.D.: Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information
technology. MIS Q. 13(3), 319–340 (1989)
Davis, F.D.: User acceptance of information technology: system characteristics, user perceptions and
behavioural impacts. Int. J. Man-Mach. Stud. 38(3), 475–587 (1993)
De Raad, B.: The Big Five Personalità Factors: The Psycholexical Approach to Personalità. Hogrefe
& Huber Publishers, Göttingen (2000)
Digman, J.M.: Higher-order factors of the Big Five. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 73, 1246–1256 (1997)
Farma, T., Cortinovis, I.: Un questionario sul “locus of control”: suo utilizzo nel contesto Italiano
(A questionnaire on the ‘locus of control”: its use in the Italian context). Ricerca in Psicoterapia,
vol. 2, Edizioni La Vita Felice/Tempo Libro srl, Milano (2000)
Falaleeva, N.G., Johnson R.D.: Influence of individual psychological traits on attribution toward
computing technology. In: Proceedings of Eighth Americas Conference on Information Systems.
ACIS 2002. Dalias, Texas, USA. pp. 1028–1033 (2002)
Gena, C.: Methods and techniques for the evaluation of user-adaptive systems. The Knowl. Eng. Rev.
20(1), 1–37 (2005)

60

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

Gena, C., Torre, I.: The importance of adaptivity to provide onboard services: a preliminary evaluation
of an adaptive tourist information service onboard vehicles. Appl. Artif. Intell. (Special Issue on
AI in Mobile Systems) 18(6), 549–580 (2004)
Giannoutsos, V.: Stress, attitudes and personality in computing. In: Proceedings of ETHICOMP 2004,
Syros, Gr. (2004)
Goren-Bar, D., Graziola, I., Rocchi, C., Pianesi, F., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M.: Designing and redesigning an affective interface for an adaptive museum guide. In: Proceedings of Affective Computing
and Intelligent Interaction: First International Conference, October 22–24, 2005, pp. 939–946
(2005a) Beijing, China
Goren-Bar, D., Graziola, I., Kuflik, T., Pianesi, F., Rocchi, C., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M.: I like it: an
affective interface for a multimodal museum guide. In: Proceedings of Workshop on Affective
Interaction, January 9, pp. 21–26, San Diego, U.S.A. (2005b)
Grinter, R.E., Aoki, P.M., Hurst, A. Szymanski, M.H., Thornton, J.D., Woodruff, A.: Revisiting the
visit: understanding how technology can shape the museum visit. In: Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW 2002, pp. 146–155. New Orleans,
LA. (2002)
Heider, F.: The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations. Wiley, New York (1957)
Hitzeman, J., Mellish, C., Oberiander, J.: Dynamic generation of museum web pages: The intelligent
labelling explorer. Arch. Museum Inform. 11, 107–115 (1997)
Horvitz, M.: Principles of mixed-initiative user interfaces. In: Proceedings of CHI 99, ACM SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Pittsburgh, pp. 159–166 PA, ACM Press.
(1999)
Howard, P.: The Owner’s Manual for the Brain. Bard Press, Austin, TX 1999 (2nd Edition), 2006 (3rd
edition) (1994)
Howard, P.J.: The Owner’s Manual for the Brain: Everyday Applications from Mind-Brain Research.
Bard Press. Austin, TX (2000)
Hristova, N., O’Hare, G.M.P.: Ad-me: wireless advertising adapted to the user location, device and
emotions. In: Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences –
2004, vol. 9, p. 90285c (2004)
Jameson, A.: Adaptive interfaces and agents. In: Jacko, J., Sears, A. (eds.) Human-Computer Interaction Handbook, pp. 305–330 Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ (2003)
Jameson, A., Schwarzkopf, E.: Pros and cons of controllability: an empirical study. In: Brusilovsky,
P., Conejo, E. (eds.) Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-based Systems: Proceedings of
AH2002, pp. 193–202 Malaga, Spain. (2002)
John, O.P., Srivastava, S.: The big five trait taxonomy: history, measurement, and theoretical perspectives. In: Pervin, L. A., John, O.P. (eds.) Handbook of Personality. Theory and Research, 2nd edn.,
pp. 102–138. Guilford, New York (1999)
Johnson, R.D., Marakas, G.M., Palmer, J.W., Tool or social actor? Factors contributing to differential
social attributions toward computing technology, University of Central Florida Working Paper,
Orlando, FL (2001)
Johnson, R.D., Marakas, G.M., Palmer, J.W.: Differential social attributions toward computing technology: An empirical investigation Int. J. Human-Comput. Stud. 64(5), 446–460 (2006)
Kay, J.: Learner control. User Model. User-Adap. Interact. 11(1–2), 111–127 (2001)
Kruger, A., Butz, A. Muller, Ch., Stahl, Ch., Wasinger, R., Steinberg, K.E., Dirschl, A.: The connected
user interface: realizing a personal situated navigation service. In: Proceedings of Intelligent User
Interfaces (IUI2004), pp. 161–168 Madeira, Portugal (2004)
Lester, C.Y., Brown, M.: Proposing CAPS as a link in the bridge across the divide. In: Proceedings of
Grace Hopper Celebration – Women in Computing 2004, Chicago (2004)
Marakas, G.M., Johnson, R.D., Palmer, J.W.: A theoretical model of differential social attributions
toward computing technology: When the metaphor becomes the model. Int. J. Human-Comput.
Stud. 52(4), 719–750 (2000)
Mayes, J.T., Fowler, C.J.H.: Learning technology and usability: a framework for understanding courseware. Interact. Comput. 11, 485–497 (1999)
McCrae, R.R., John, O.P.: An introduction to the five-factors model and its applications. J. Pers. 60,
175–215.
Negroponte, N.: Being Digital. Vintage Books (1995)
Nielsen, J.: Paper versus computer implementations as mockup scenarios for heuristic evaluation. In:
Proceedings of 3rd IFIP Conf. Human-Computer Interaction - INTERACT 90, 27–31 Aug, 1990,
pp. 315–320 Cambridge, U.K. (1990)
Norman, D.A.: The Invisible Computer. MIT Press, pp. 23–50, 185–202 (1998)

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

61

Oberlander, J., Mellish, C., O’Donnell, M., Knott, A.: Exploring a gallery with intelligent labels.
In: Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Hypermedia and Interactivity in
Museums, pp. 153–161. Paris, September, (1997)
Oppermann, R., Specht, M.: A context-sensitive nomadic information system as an exhibition guide.
In: Proceedings of the Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing Second International Symposium,
HUC 2000, pp. 127–142 Bristol, UK. (2000)
Petrelli, D., Not, E., Sarini, M., Stock, O., Strapparava, C., Zancanaro, M.: HyperAudio: locationawareness + adaptivity. In: Proceedings of International Conference on Computer-Human Interaction CHI 99. pp. 21–22 Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (1999)
Petrelli, D., Not, E.: User-centred design of flexible hypermedia for a mobile guide: reflections on
the hyperaudio experience. User Model. User-Adap. Interac. J. Personalization Res. 15(3–4),
303–338. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11257–005–8816–1 (2005)
Perugini, M., Di Blas, L.: Analyzing personality-related adjectives from an eticemic perspective: the
big five marker scales (BFMS) and the Italian AB5C taxonomy. In: De Raad, B., Perugini, M.
(eds.) Big Five Assessment. Hogrefe und Huber Publishers, pp. 281–304 Göttingen (2002)
Preece, J., Rogers, Y., Sharp, H.: Interaction Design: Beyond Human-Computer Interaction. Wiley
(2002)
Proctor, N., Tellis, C.: The state of the art in museum handhelds in 2003. In: Proceedings of Museums
and the Web. Charlotte, NC, U.S.A. (last http://www.archimuse.com/mw2003/papers/proctor/proctor.html) (2003)
Rocchi, C., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., Kruppa, M., Krüger, A.: The museum visit: generating seamless
personalized presentations on multiple devices. In: Proceedings of Intelligent User Interfaces
(IUI2004), pp. 316–318 Madeira, Portugal (2004)
Rocchi, C., Zancanaro, M.: Rhetorical patterns for adaptive video documentaries. In: Proceedings of
Adaptive Hypermedia Conference, pp. 324–327 Eindhoven, Holland (2004)
Rotter, J.B.: Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of reinforcement. Psychol.
Monogr. 80 (1, Whole N. 609) (1966)
Sharifi, G., Vassileva, J., Deters, R.: Seamless communication and access to information for mobile
users in a wireless environment. In: Proceedings ICEIS2004 International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems, pp. 122–130 Porto (2004)
Shneiderman, B.: Eight golden rules for interface design. In: Designing the User Interface, 3rd edn.
Addison Wesley, U.S.A. (1998)
Totterdell, P., Boyle, E.: The evaluation of adaptive systems. In: Browne, D., Totterdell, P., Norman,
M. (eds.) Adaptive User Interfaces, pp. 161–194. Academic Press, London (1990)
Virzi, R.A., Sokolov, J.L., Karis, D.: Usability problem identification using both low- and high-fidelity prototypes. In: Proceedings of International Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems – CHI’96. Vancouver, pp. 236–243 British Columbia, Canada (1996)
Wexelblat, A., Maes, P.: Issues for Software Agent UI. Unpublished manuscript, available from
http://wex.www.media.mit.edu/people/wex/. (1997).
Wicker, A.W.: Attitudes versus actions: the relationship of verbal and overt behavioral responses to
attitude objects. J. Soc. Iss. 25, 41–78. (1969)
Wiggins, J.S.: The Five-Factor Model of Personality. Guilford Press New York, NY (1996)

Author’s Vitae
Dr. Dina Goren-Bar ITC-irst, via Sommarive 18, 38050 Povo (Tn), Italy. Dr. Goren-Bar is a Lecturer
in the Department of Information Systems Engineering at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, BeerSheva, Israel. She received a PhD. in Computers and Information Systems from Tel-Aviv University,
Israel, and an MA in Psychology from the Hebrew University at Jerusalem, Israel. She is a Certified
Educational Psychologist and Certified System Analyst. Her research interests focus on multi-modal
interaction design, functional evaluation and user studies of intelligent applications applied mainly to
telemedicine and entertainment. She has published numerous articles, and owns several patents in the
fields of Intelligent User Interfaces and Personalized Information Visualization. She was appointed
to a number of program and organizing committees of conferences and workshops. The present work
has been carried out while she was a visiting researcher at the Center for Scientific and Technological
Research – ITC-irst and at the Center for Evaluation of Language and Communication Technologies,
located in Trento, Italy.
Ilenia Graziola ITC-irst, via Sommarive 18, 38050 Povo (Tn), Italy. Ilenia Graziola is studying Cognitive Psychology in Italy and has been at the ITC in Trento, Italy since 2004, working on evaluation,

62

User Model User-Adap Inter (2006) 16: 31–62

text authoring and adaptivity for multimedia museum guide. In particular she is working on various
research aspects related to the development and evaluation of Intelligent User Interfaces, Context
Awareness and Content Preparation. This work is conducted in the framework of the collaboration
between the University of Haifa, Israel and ITC-irst. Her contribution is based on experiences gained
both from her degree thesis work as well as her current research.
Dr. Fabio Pianesi ITC-irst, via Sommarive 18, 38050 Povo (Tn), Italy. Dr. Pianesi is Head of the
Cognitive and Communication Division of ITC-irst, which he joined in 1988 after working as a clinical
neuropsychologist. Dr. Pianesi is Chairman of CELCT (Centre for the Evaluation of Language and
Communication Technology). He teaches Cognitive Ergonomics at the University of Trento and is
a member of the Coordinating Committee of the Information and Communication Doctoral School
of the University of Trento. Dr. Pianesi received his ‘Laurea’ degree in Psychology from the University of Rome, and a Specialization degree in Computer Science from the same University. He
has publications in theoretical linguistics, formal ontology and logics, natural language processing,
machine translation, and human computer interaction. He has authored over ninety technical papers
and published two books.
Dr. Massimo Zancanaro ITC-irst, via Sommarive 18, 38050 Povo (Tn), Italy. Massimo Zancanaro has
been working as a researcher in the Cognitive and Communication Technologies Division at ITC-irst
since 1994. He received is Laurea Degree in Computer Science from the University of Milano in 1992.
His primary interest is in the field of Intelligent Interfaces and in particular language-based interfaces.
He was appointed to a number of program and organizing committees of conferences and workshops
in this area. Since 2004, he has taught a course on Computer-Human Interaction at the International
PhD in Telecomunications at the University of Trento.

View publication stats

