Accelerat ing t he world's research.

The inﬂuence of a location-aware
mobile guide on museum visitors'
behavior
Tsvi Kuflik, Joel Lanir

Cite this paper

Downloaded from Academia.edu 

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of t he best relat ed papers 

An int egrat ive framework for ext ending t he boundaries of t he museum visit experience: linkin…
Tsvi Kuflik, Joel Lanir

Examining proact iveness and choice in a locat ion-aware mobile museum guide
Tsvi Kuflik, Joel Lanir
Examining Fact ors Influencing t he Disrupt iveness of Not iﬁcat ions in a Mobile Museum Cont ext
Tsvi Kuflik, Joel Lanir

Interacting with Computers Advance Access published February 24, 2013
© The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The British Computer Society. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
doi:10.1093/iwc/iwt002

The Influence of a Location-Aware
Mobile Guide on Museum Visitors’
Behavior
Joel Lanir1∗ , Tsvi Kuflik1 , Eyal Dim1 , Alan J. Wecker1 and Oliviero Stock2
1 University

of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa 31905, Israel
2 FBK/irst, Italy
∗Corresponding author: ylanir@is.haifa.ac.il

RESEARCH HIGHLIGHTS
•
•
•
•
•

We describe a field study conducted with actual museum visitors.
We compared behavior of visitors who used a mobile guide with those who did not.
Using a mobile multimedia guide increased visit time.
The mobile guide increased holding power and attraction power of marked exhibits
The use of the guide disrupted social interaction of visitors who came in a group.
Keywords: mobile museum guide; museum visit behavior; group behavior
Editorial Board Member: Fabio Paternò
Received 26 November 2012; Revised 3 December 2012

1. INTRODUCTION
There is no doubt that mobile technologies highly affect many
aspects of our daily lives. The use of smart mobile handheld devices has changed the way we communicate, work and
entertain ourselves. Many people use their personal, hand-held
devices as a point of contact to communicate with their peers,
organize their daily activities, as well as get information about
their surroundings at any place and any time. The ubiquitous
use of mobile devices also affects the way people visit and tour

locations in their leisure time. Many people use a mobile device
as a navigational aid to guide them when visiting a new city.
Furthermore, more and more people also use mobile devices as
a source to retrieve guidance and interpretational information
when visiting a new location or a cultural heritage site (Billings,
2009; Cheverst et al., 2000a). A tourist who is new to a city can
choose from a wide variety of mobile applications and services
that provide tourists with various options to help them with their
visit. Similarly, many cultural heritage sites offer the use of an

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

Many museums offer their visitors the use of a mobile guide to enhance their visit experience. Novel
mobile guides have the potential to provide personalized, context-aware, rich content to museum
visitors. However, they might also affect the way visitors behave and interact. While many studies
have examined novel features that these guides can provide to enhance the visit experience, few
have looked into the impact that a mobile guide might have on the actual behavior of the visitors.
We describe a field study conducted with 403 actual museum visitors, over a period of 10 months
comparing behaviors of visitors who used a mobile multimedia location-aware guide during their
visit and that of visitors who did not use any electronic aid. Results indicate that visitors’ behavior
was altered considerably when using a mobile guide. Visitors using a mobile guide visited the museum
longer and were attracted to and spent more time at exhibits where they could get information from
the guide. In addition, we provide empirical evidence of the decoupling effect that a mobile guide
has on pairs of visitors. Using a mobile guide caused visitors to reduce proximity and to interact
less with their fellow group members. Finally, we discuss what may be done to reduce this negative
social effect.

2

Joel Lanir et al.
a better understanding of how their design decisions affect
museum and cultural heritage visitors.
We report on the results of a field study conducted with
403 actual museum visitors through a period of 10 months.
We compared two groups of visitors: visitors who used a
multimedia mobile museum visitors guide as part of their visit
and visitors who did not. The museum was equipped with a
positioning system that was used to automatically track and
time-tag visitor movements and circulation across the museum
(regardless of their use or lack of use of a mobile guide). Visit
logs were used to unobtrusively assess participants’ behavior
in the museum, including the locations visited, time spent in
each of the locations, and proximity to other visitors and group
members. Our results indicate that the use of a mobile guide
significantly altered visitor behavior. We discuss the way that
individual as well as group circulation in the museum has
been altered, providing empirical evidence and showing how
a mobile guide impedes social interaction of small groups of
visitors. In light of the results, we discuss and suggest possible
ways to use the technology to enhance social interaction.
The paper is structured as follows. First, we present related
work of traditional methods of observations on museum visitor
behavior, work related to recent mobile guides and studies
concerned with the group museum visit. Next, we describe
the museum infrastructure used for the study, including a
description of the museum, the positioning system and the
mobile guide. We then describe the methodology of the
field study followed by its results. Finally, we discuss
the implications of the results and present our conclusions.

2. RELATED WORK
We first describe the standard methods used by museum
practitioners and researchers for measuring visitor behavior as
well as studies that used automatic instrumented collection of
these measures. We then present a short survey on existing
museum guides and the way they are said to affect visitor
behavior. Finally, we describe the literature pertaining to group
and social aspects of the museum visit, including technology
that was especially built to assist small groups in museums.
2.1.

Measuring museum visitor behavior

Museum practitioners often use ethnographic observations of
visitor behavior in order to improve their educational exhibits,
provide better interpretations and better understand the way the
audience is using the content provided to them (Bollo and Dal
Pozzolo, 2005). Various museum researchers have used manual
ethnographic observations to examine issues such as visitor
circulation (Bitgood, 1992; 2006; Klein, 1993), use of signage
and labels (McManus, 1989), interaction with exhibits (Yalowitz
and Bronnenkant, 2009) and social interaction (Leinhardt and
Knutson, 2004). When tracking and timing visitor circulation,

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

audio or multimedia mobile guide to their visitors to enhance
their visit experience.
A mobile museum guide has the potential to highly improve
the visitor’s experience. It can provide visitors with a wide
variety of new and important services that can aid the visitor
during the visit. The visitor can receive personalized adaptive
information from a vast amount of content that can suit his or her
personal needs at a particular time. Information can be tailored
according to the visitor’s learning abilities and preferences
(Ardissono et al., 2011). While having many potential benefits,
a mobile guide can also have some disadvantages. It may
focus the visitor’s attention on the mobile device rather than
on the museum artifacts. Furthermore, for visitors coming in
small groups, it might isolate the visitor from his or her peers,
effectively dissocializing the group (Grinter et al., 2002; Hsi,
2003).
Most museums today tend to think that the advantages of a
mobile guide outweigh the possible drawbacks, and thus, many
museums offer some types of interpretive electronic guide to
their visitors, as reflected by the growth in their use (Stephens,
2010). However, it is yet unclear how and to what extent does the
use of a mobile guide affect the way people visit the museum.
Although various studies have focused on introducing novel
features of mobile guides (Aoki et al., 2002; Stock et al., 2007;
Vlahakis et al., 2002), or on evaluating the usability (Cheverst
et al., 2000b; Kjeldskov et al., 2005) or the acceptance and
satisfaction of visitors using them (Kaasinen, 2005; Petrelli and
Not, 2005), little comparative quantitative evidence is available
on how mobile guides actually affect visitors’ behavior. In its
basic form (not as a navigational aid or as a provider of other
advanced services), a mobile guide provides interpretation to
the museum artifacts and collections. Interpretation aids such
as labels and museum texts have long existed in the museum
and have extensively been examined in order to provide the
visitor with the best possible experience, taking into account
issues such as readability, museum fatigue (Bitgood, 2009)
and learning effects (McManus, 1989). The basic question that
we ask is how does this transition from a static, public, labelbased interpretation style to a dynamic, personal, mobile-based
interpretation style affect the way visitors move around and
behave in the museum. Given the wealth of research about
the application of novel technology in cultural heritage, it is
quite surprising that only a few publications describe studies
that have examined the basic question of how a mobile guide
actually affects visitors’ movement patterns, circulation, timing
or social interaction (although the negative social impact was
noted by many researchers, such as Angliss, 2006a,b; Proctor
and Tellis, 2003 and more). Furthermore, no studies that we are
aware of have directly compared visitors who used a mobile
guide during their visit with people who did not use a guide. As
such, this study aims to take a step back from the design of novel
museum technology and to understand the basic behavioral
influences that mobile technology bring on to the museum
and thus provide researchers and mobile guide designers with

Influence of a Location-aware Mobile Guide
museum researchers have measured many variables such as
the total time in an area, total number of stops, proportion
of visitors who stop at a specific exhibit, visitor path, ‘down
time’ (time of nonexhibit related behavior such as talking on
the phone) and level of engagement with the exhibit (Yalowitz
and Bronnenkant, 2009). Summarizing these variables while
focusing on visitor interaction with exhibits, two measures are
often used in museum studies (Bollo and Dal Pozzolo, 2005;
Serrell, 1997):

Together, these variables effectively capture how thoroughly
visitors were engaged with an exhibit. While not being a
complete indicator of using an exhibit, these measures are
practical, immediately applicable ideas for thinking about how
visitors use exhibits and help to progress toward the goal of
thorough use of exhibits by their audience (Serrell, 1997).
A different direction of museum circulation research has
looked at classifying visitor movement styles into categories.
Veron and Levasseur (1983) used ethnographical observations
to categorize visitor movements into four category styles: an
ant visitor who tends to follow a specific path and spends a lot
of time observing most exhibits. A fish who moves around in
the center of the room and usually avoids looking at exhibits’
details; the butterfly visitor does not follow a specific path but
rather is guided by the physical orientation of the exhibits and
stops frequently to look for more information and, finally, the
grasshopper visitor seems to have a specific preference for some
preselected exhibits and spends a lot of time observing them
while tending to ignore the others. Zancanaro et al. (2007)
used automatically generated logs of visitor positioning from
users who used a mobile guide to validate this categorization.
Sparacino (2003) proposed a different categorization of three
main categories: the greedy visitor who wants to know and see
as much as possible, the selective visitor who selects and filters
certain objects that is of his or her interest and the busy visitor
who strolls around the museum to get a general impression of the
exhibition without spending too much time at a certain place.
The visitor type was determined during the visit itself using
probabilistic models according to visitors’ tracked behavior and
was used to present corresponding content. Hatala and Wakkary
(2005) used the same categorization in order to provide visitors
with audio-only context-aware information. Finally, Millonig

and Gartner (2011) identified a typology of spatial–temporal
pedestrian behavior in shopping environments as follows: swift,
convenient, discerning, utilitarian and hedonistic, which could
have museum counterparts.
Social interaction is an important part of the museum visit
(see Section 2.3). Measuring social interaction in the museum
has been done in several ways. Visitor conversations with their
peers can be recorded and later analyzed. The amount of time
people talk, number of utterances or a more detailed analysis
of the content of the conversation can indicate the amount of
visitors’ engagement with their group (Leinhardt and Knutson,
2004). In addition, post-visit interviews with visitors can include
questions on group interaction and group behavior. Finally,
proximity of visitors to the other group members can be used
as an indicator of group cohesion and social interaction (Dim
and Kuflik, 2009; McManus, 1988) with more proximity being
an indicator of a stronger social connection of group members.
2.2.

Impact of mobile guides on visitors’ behavior

Mobile museum visitor guides have long been available for
visitors in museums and tourists in cities. In modern times, the
use of electronic mobile guides in museums in order to enhance
the user experience is widespread (Ardissono et al., 2011; Tallon
and Walker, 2008). A survey from 2008 indicates that most
(66%) of the mobile hand-held guides in use at the time were
simple audio guides, with a trend in increasing number of guides
using smart hand-held devices (Tallon and Walker, 2008). With
the ubiquity and infiltration of smart hand-held devices, this
trend is likely to continue. An extensive survey of existing
mobile museum guides can be found in Ardissono et al. (2011).
Mobile visitor guides have many unique advantages
over more traditional museum interpretation tools. A major
advantage of mobile guides is their potential to personalize
presentation delivery while adapting to the visitor’s needs, thus
helping the visitor receive the content he or she wishes at the
right time out of a vast amount of possible content (Ardissono
et al., 2011). A multimedia mobile guide integrates information
that is perceived in different modalities. Recent guides include
dynamic images and videos, in addition to audio commentary.
Another advantage of a mobile guide is its availability. While a
human guide may not be available at all times and might
be expensive to hire for small groups or for individuals, mobile
guides are available anytime. Furthermore, an electronic guide
can support a multitude of languages as well as cater the needs of
different visitors’interaction and learning styles (i.e. people who
do not like to read but rather listen to explanations) and various
populations (i.e. people with disabilities). Finally, in addition to
interpretational content, mobile guides can also provide other
kind of services, such as navigational support, information on
events and more.
Although the advantages of mobile guides are clear, there
are a few downsides that the use of these guides might cause.
One of the main claims against using a multimedia guide is

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

(i) Attraction power indicates the relative incidence of
people who have stopped in front of an object or an
exhibit during their visit. It is calculated by dividing
the number of people who stop, by the total number of
people who have visited the museum or gallery. This
measure provides us with an initial idea of the power of
attraction of the exhibit.
(ii) Holding power measures the average time spent in front
of an exhibit. It is calculated by summing up the time a
visitor spent in front of a specific exhibit. This measure
provides us with an initial idea of the power of an exhibit
to hold the interest of a visitor.

3

4

Joel Lanir et al.
findings indicate that, in general, visitors using the guide had
more extensive learning experiences, measured both by direct
knowledge questions and by subjective responses of visitors’
perceived learning.
Finally, several studies focused on observing the behavior
and later interviewing a small number of visitors. Hsi (2003)
observed and interviewed 15 visitors who used a novel mobile
guide in the Exploratorium in San Francisco. Visitors reported
a need to better integrate the virtual and real-world context (i.e.
the guide have caused several visitors a disconnection with the
real-world). Visitors also noted that to some extent the use of
the mobile devices caused them to feel isolated and less social.
Bellotti et al. (2002) observed the behavior of 10 individuals.
They also noted a tendency of the guide to isolate the visitors as
well as an effect of the guide on visitor’s pace. On the contrary,
our study is a large-scale deployment study that is based on
empirical analysis of log data from an indoor positioning system
rather than subjective observations and interviews to understand
visitor behavior patterns.
As presented above, many researchers talk about the
advantages and disadvantages of mobile guides in various
settings. However, few of these claims are actually examined
or backed-up by empirical observations. Claims on the
advantages of mobile guides (i.e. personalization, adaptation,
much content) are assumed as given and researchers focus
on delivering software solutions to support these features.
Similarly, claims on the disadvantages (i.e. focusing on the
device rather than the artifacts, isolating visitors) are presumed
and researchers invest much effort in overcoming these
problems. Few deployment studies have been employed to
examine these assumptions and to investigate the effects of a
mobile guide. Moreover, we are not aware of any study that
compared the behavior of museum visitors at the same site
with and without a mobile guide. This study uses empirical
observations to examine how a mobile guide actually affects
visitors’ behavior and to compare it with a visit to the same site
without a guide, thus it is aimed to provide evidence that would
support or refute some of the above claims.

2.3.

Group museum visit

The social aspects of the visit were shown to contribute
to learning in the museum as well as to the general visit
experience (Dierking and Falk, 1994; Leinhardt and Knutson,
2004; McManus, 1988). Indeed, people often come to museums
in small groups, mainly with family and friends (Falk, 2009).
Falk (2009) claims that only 60% of the visitor’s attention
is spent on looking at the exhibits, while the other 40%
of the visitor’s attention is directed elsewhere, with much
of it focused on conversations with other members of the
individual’s social group. Bitgood and Shettel (1996) posit that
‘the overwhelming percentage of visitors come in groups—
usually with families or friends unless they are part of a

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

that it detracts visitors’ attention from real objects and artifacts.
Visitors, it is claimed, might focus on the device’s screen instead
of looking at the artifacts (Petrelli and Not, 2005; Tallon and
Walker, 2008). Although this might be true in some cases, it has
been shown that dynamic images, in an illustrative genre such
as in guides, do not take away continuous attention from the real
thing (Alfaro et al., 2005), and with the correct design, electronic
information can add rather than detract attention given to the
artifacts (Gammon and Burch, 2008). Another concern is that
visitors might mainly be interested in exhibits covered by the
guide, and thus would be guided to certain areas in the museum
while neglecting other areas. While this might be true, this is not
different from other forms of museum interpretations in which
larger focus on certain exhibits would cause the audience to
focus there. Finally, the use of headphones might detach the
visitor from the environment including other visitors or museum
personnel, isolating visitors from their companions (Grinter
et al., 2002).
Given the vast amount of research focusing on applying
novel mobile technology in museums, as assessed by numerous
surveys (e.g. Ardissono et al., 2011; Baus et al., 2005;
Schwinger et al., 2002), it is quite surprising that there are
relatively few reported studies about the impact of mobile
technology on the visitor behavior. This is probably due
to the fact that most works developed and experimented
with research prototypes that were evaluated in short-term,
controlled experiments. Usually these prototypes were not
further developed into deployed systems, and could not be
used continuously and independently by regular visitors. Hence
they fall short of exploring the impact of the novel technology
in realistic settings. Among the works that referred to the
impact of technology on the visitor behavior, most studies
report on museum evaluations of a deployed mobile guide,
usually focusing on user satisfaction and acceptance obtained
from surveys (e.g. Bird, 2007). For example, Proctor and Tellis
(2003) report on a large-scale study of 852 visitors using a
multimedia guide in the Tate Modern. Results focus on a
qualitative analysis of the user interface, infrastructure and
visitor’s acceptance of the guide. Bellotti et al. (2002) describe
a deployment and evaluation of a guide at the Genoa Aquarium.
In a first study, they used user surveys and interviews of
151 visitors for general evaluation purposes. They showed a
general satisfaction and enjoyment from using the guide, as
well as specific user interface recommendations. Similarly, in
the Marble museum project (Ciavarella and Paterno, 2004),
surveys of 35 visitors showed general visitor appreciation
of the mobile guide. Other studies focused on the impact
that a mobile guide might have on learning. In a second
study conducted by Bellotti et al. (2002), results of postvisit recognition tasks of 120 visitors suggest that the tour
guide supports better knowledge acquisition than without
the guide. Manning and Sims (2004) surveyed 378 visitors,
comparing visitors who used and who did not use their iTour
system focusing on the learning impact of the guide. Their

Influence of a Location-aware Mobile Guide

mobile guides that are intended to be used by more than
one visitor. Most of the social-related aspects were attributed
to collaborative listening to audio using the speaker of the
mobile device. Kenteris et al. (2011) surveyed mobile tourist
guides, but the survey focused mainly on technology and
features. They implicitly noted the social aspects by pointing
out communication services among group members and group
members locating services offered by several systems, but they
did not recommend addressing the social aspect of the tours
any further. Emmanouilidis et al. (2012) defined a taxonomy of
mobile guides after analyzing a large number of applications.
In their taxonomy, the social aspect is part of the context, but
they show only a few systems among the many they surveyed
that address the social context and note that, in general, context
awareness is poorly addressed in mobile guides. Specifically,
they note that even though social interaction has the potential
to significantly enhance the user experience, it is not a common
part of current mobile guides and recommend that it should be
better addressed.
Among the systems that tried to specifically address the
social issues, Sotto Voce (Aoki et al., 2002; Grinter et al.,
2002) enabled visitors to ‘eavesdrop’ to each other and to
share their mobile guide audio. They claim that audio sharing
may result in a better social experience (audio sharing is a
common and simple social activity, as noted by Raptis et al.
(2005)). Suh et al. (2011) extended the eavesdropping idea
by enabling synchronization of the audio control. ARCHIE
(Luyten et al., 2006; Schroyen et al., 2009) aimed at avoiding
the isolated experience that may accompany the use of mobile
electronic guides by providing a framework for creating
collaborative games in the museum for youngsters and voice
communication for enabling remote interaction for adults. In
the framework of the project, two prototypes were developed
and the authors reported on successful implementation where
students enjoyed the system and learned while playing. Games
are especially suitable for students, as demonstrated also by
the UbiCicero museum guide (Ghiani et al., 2009), which
promotes social interaction among visitors through educational
games embedded in mobile devices. Interaction takes place both
explicitly, as in treasure hunts and other cooperative games,
and implicitly as in individual games with sporadic interaction.
Similarly, other projects looked at gaming as a possible
collaborative activity for small groups in museums (Dini et al.,
2007; Sumi and Mase, 2001). Research has also been conducted
on technology-based coordinated dramatic storytelling for
enhancing group interaction in the museum (Callaway et al.,
2011). As for basic infrastructure, the GUIDE system (Cheverst
et al., 2000b) as well as PIL (Kuflik et al., 2011a,b),
InfoTour (Paganelli et al., 2009) and UbiCicero (Ghiani
et al., 2009) provided limited communication capabilities,
enabling group members to communicate and interact when
they are not in close proximity, using the technology to bridge
physical distance, and to find the whereabouts of their group
members.

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

school group’. He sees the social contact as a significant
aspect of informal learning settings, and sometimes as the most
important part of the experience. McManus (1988) describes
the social context of museum visitors, which involves small
groups of children, couples and adults. McManus also describes
the deeper involvement generated by the social intimacy of
visitor groups that had good social relationships, moved around
the museum in closed units and were more likely to engage
in behaviors that would improve their visit experience. The
contribution of the group to the enhancement of learning
and visit experience is emphasized by Falk and Dierking
(2000) and supported by Leinhardt and Knutson (2004) in
their work on museum conversations. Recent research note
four main characteristics of the social experience of a museum
visit: (i) increasing the group-members’ cognitive–emotional
arousal (by provoking interest, thought, excitement, motivation
etc.). (ii) Enhancing the level of informal learning gained
by the group members (the ability to generate, understand,
remember and use concepts, explanations and models from
the museum). (iii) Enabling recharging of personal attention
reserves while the visit goes on. (iv) The ability of group
members to share and reflect impressions during and after
the visit (Bell, 2009; Falk, 2009). Group behavior of museum
visitors has been analyzed, showing that some of the group
members tend to separate during a museum visit, others may
walk together but rarely interact, and finally there are groups
that move together and continuously interact (Dim and Kuflik,
2009).
Visitors who visit museums in organized or small groups
often use the services of a human museum guide. The concept
of a human tourist guide, as described by Cohen (1985), reveals
that the human museum guide serves many purposes such as a
mentor, pathfinder, social mediator, culture broker and leader
to the museum visitors. Moreover, from the social point of
view, having one human guide for a group creates opportunity
for interaction among the group members. Technology has
the potential of offering some services traditionally offered
by the human guide, in order to enhance the museum visit
experience. These include services such as navigation, locationbased services, content management, information delivery,
themes and narrative presentation, and multiple personalized
adaptations to the needs of small groups and individual visitors,
during the museum visit (Dim and Kuflik, 2010; Krüger et al.,
2007; Stock et al., 2007).
As shown earlier, the social context seems to be an extremely
important aspect of the museum visit. However, most existing
mobile guides at museums today are designed as a oneperson device that supports a personal experience rather than
a group one. Schwinger et al. (2002) surveyed the state-ofthe-art mobile guide research at that time and recommended
addressing also the neglected social aspects when developing
mobile guides. Over the past 10 years, considerable amount
of research efforts was dedicated to supporting various social
aspects. Raptis et al. (2005) in another survey, noted several

5

6

Joel Lanir et al.

3. THE MOBILE GUIDE SYSTEM AND THE
MUSEUM INFRASTRUCTURE
The study was carried out at the Hecht museum, a
medium-sized, established archaeological museum located at
the campus of the University of Haifa. The museum offers a
number of exhibitions related to the archaeology of the land of
Israel. Visiting the museum is free of charge, hence visitors also
come for short visits, and there is a good proportion of people
who do not visit the whole museum in one single time. The
participants of the study used a museum visitor guide system
developed as part of the PIL project (Kuflik et al., 2011b). The
PIL museum guide allows visitors to move freely around the
exhibitions while the system identifies the visitor’s location
and accordingly provides the visitor with relevant information.
Information is shown in the form of multimedia presentations,
approximately 1 min in length, consisting of a narrated text
over a set of selected images enhanced with illustrative graphics
using different cinematographic techniques such as pan, zoom
and fade. When the visitor approaches one of the instrumented
exhibits, she is prompted with a frontal image on the guide.
Exhibits with available information are highlighted on the image
(Fig. 1a). After the visitor chooses an exhibit (by pressing on it),
the system presents a list of available presentations concerning
the chosen exhibit (Fig. 1b). The presentations are represented
by questions that aim at initiating a dialogue with the visitor
based on the content of the presentation, and trigger the visitor
to think and select the most interesting one to be answered. The
visitor can then select and view a presentation (Fig. 1c). While
viewing, the user can pause or stop the presentation at any time.
As part of the project, the museum was equipped with a radio
frequency (RF)-based positioning system based on a wireless
sensor network (WSN). To better understand how we measured
a visitor’s behavior, we briefly describe the positioning system’s

Figure 2. Positioning system equipment and usage scenario.

components and functionality. For a detailed description, see
(Kuflik et al., 2011a). Figure 2 shows how the positioning
system is used and presents its components. The WSN is formed
by three different kinds of objects: fixed RF tags called Beacons,
small (matchbox size) mobile wearable RF tags called Blinds
and RF to TCP Gateways. Beacons and Gateways have the same
size and are roughly twice the size of a Blind (about a cigarettes’
box size). The Gateways transfer the data reported by the Blinds
and Beacons’ status over a local area network to the PIL server.
Beacons are statically located at entrances and exits, as well as
near relevant locations of interest in the museum, while Blinds
are carried by visitors. When a Blind is in proximity of a Beacon
(determining location) or another Blind (determining proximity
to another user) that Blind reports this information to the server
through the nearest Gateway.
The PIL server parses, filters and enhances the information,
determining the visitor’s position. The positioning system also
detects orientation of visitors, using embedded magnetometers,

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

Figure 1. The museum guide interface. When the visitor arrives to a point of interest, the system provides the relevant position illustration. After
choosing an exhibit, a list of questions about the exhibit is presented. The visitor can then choose a question that triggers a multimedia presentation
related to the exhibit.

Influence of a Location-aware Mobile Guide

7

enabling the assessment where the visitors are facing at any
given moment. Figure 3 presents a map of the museum with the
locations of the Beacons. While providing a reasonable indoor
positioning solution, the system has two major weaknesses.
First, it only knows when a person is in proximity to a Beacon or
to another Blind. Thus, it does not detect positioning in transition
from one Beacon to another. Secondly, the specified accuracy of
the detection in proximity to each Beacon is between 1.5 to 2 m.
Thus, when we detect a user being in proximity to a Beacon,
we can only know that he or she is within a short range of that
Beacon, without knowing exact position.
Forty-five locations of interest were covered by Beacons in
the museum in six exhibition rooms providing visitors carrying
Blinds with contextual information seen on their museum guide
as soon as they enter the vicinity of the location. Beacons
were mainly positioned near important museum artifacts as
was determined by the museum’s curator, as well as near other
landmarks such as exists and entrances to rooms.

4. METHODOLOGY
4.1.

Objectives

The study comparatively examined visit behavior patterns of
museum visitors of two groups. The first group used a mobile
visitor’s multimedia guide (see Section 3) during a regular
museum visit while the second group visited the museum
without a guide. The objectives of the study were to assess
the way that a visitor’s guide affects museum visitor behavior
patterns in terms of the way that people visit the museum:
where do they go, where do they stop and in general, how does
technology affect the way they visit the museum. In addition, we

also wanted to assess differences in subjective attitudes between
those who used the guide and those who did not.
Our main hypotheses before the study were:
(1) Visitors using the mobile guide will spend more time
in the museum than visitors who do not use the mobile
guide. We believe that mobile guide users might extend
their visit time because of the time it takes to consume
information.
(2) Visitors using the mobile guide would spend more time
in marked exhibits than visitors without the mobile guide
(i.e. the holding power of marked exhibit will increase
for people using the mobile guide). We hypothesize that
the fact that there is more interpretation (in the terms of
multimedia presentations) in marked exhibits will cause
visitors to stay longer at these locations.
(3) The percentage of visitors who visit marked exhibits
would be higher for those who used the mobile guide
than for those who did not (i.e. attraction power of the
marked exhibit would be higher for the mobile guide
users). Beacons were placed at major exhibits of the
museum. While for the major museum exhibits, we
believe that there would be no difference in attraction
power, attraction power of less-often-visited exhibits
might increase due to the fact that the visitors using
the guide go especially there.
(4) Using the mobile guide will separate groups and cause
people to be less ‘together’ than without using the
mobile guide. Previous works have suggested that
using a mobile guide might isolate visitors from their
environment as well as from their group members
(Bellotti et al., 2002; Hsi, 2003). However, this feeling

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

Figure 3. Map of the museum. Red dots denote Beacon positions and purple dots denote gateway positions. The small part on the upper right side
is part of the second floor of the museum that was instrumented as well and connected to the first one by the stairs clearly marked on both parts.

8

Joel Lanir et al.

4.2.

Experimental design

We performed a field study with actual museum visitors. The
study design was a between-subject design in which we had
two study groups: visitors who used the mobile guide (described
above) during their visit and visitors who did not use the mobile
guide during the visit (but of course could use a paper map of the
museum and read the labels next to the exhibits). Thus, the main
variable examined was visit type: with-guide and without-guide.
4.3.

Procedure

The study was conducted during the period between March
2011 and January 2012. Visitors to the Hecht museum were
approached at the entrance of the museum and were invited to
participate in the study. Participants were randomly assigned
to one of the two study groups according to days. On certain
days of the week, all visitors were assigned to the with-guide
group, while on other days all visitors were assigned to the
without-guide group. Participants in the with-guide group were
offered the free use of the mobile museum visitor’s guide. They
were first given a short explanation on how to use the guide
and were then asked to visit the museum at their own pace,
using the guide as they wished. Participants in the without-guide
group were simply asked to wear a Blind (that reports on their
movements and proximity—see Section 3) during their visit.
Upon finishing the visit, participants in both groups were asked
to fill a short questionnaire regarding their experience. Log files
with detailed information of the visits behavior patterns were
recorded.
4.4.

Measures

For analyzing and evaluating visit behavior, we mainly
used automatically recorded visit logs. In addition, at the

end of the visit, questionnaires were handed to visitors to
gather demographic data and to assess visitor satisfaction.
These tools correspond to measuring visitors’ attitudes
and measuring visitors’ behaviors, both often measured
in museum studies (Serrell, 1997). The questionnaire was
divided into two parts: the first part of the questionnaires
consisted of general demographic information. The second
part asked about participants’ attitude toward their museum
visit experience. Questionnaire items consisted of statements to
which participants expressed their agreement on a 7-point Likert
scale to indicate how much they agreed with each statement,
ranging from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (7). Finally,
we also asked visitors in two open-ended questions to state
what were the advantages and disadvantages of using the mobile
guide. Visit logs were used to unobtrusively assess participants’
behavior in the museum. The locations visited and time spent
in each of the location were recorded by the positioning
system. All interactions with the guide including selecting
and listening to a presentation, stopping a presentation, giving
feedback to a presentation’s quality, etc., were recorded in the
museum guide’s server as log events in system logs and later
analyzed.
4.5.

Participants

Participants were actual museum visitors. Because we thought
that a minimum visit time is required to define a museum
visit, only participants who visited the museum for at least
15 min were included in the study. A total of 251 visitors
participated in the with-guide group and a total of 152 visitors
participated in the without-guide group. The reason for the
unbalanced proportion is that during a week, we had 3 days
in which we handed over the guide and 2 days in which we
asked people to wear Blinds without using the guide.
In the with-guide group, 10 out of the 251 visitors did not
fill in the questionnaires at the end (for various reasons, the
main one being they were in a hurry to go elsewhere). We
included these visitors in our log analysis because although
not filling out the questionnaires, their system usage and visit
behavior is still valid. Therefore, the log analysis of the withguide group included 251 participants, while the questionnaire
analysis included 241 participants. Out of the 241 participants,
139 were males and 102 were females. The age of the visitors
ranged from 7 to 83 years with an average of 43.2 years
(SD = 18.4). Eighty-seven of the visitors have visited the Hecht
museum before, and for 154 it was their first visit.
In the without-guide group, out of the 152 visitors, 8 did
not fill in the questionnaire. Therefore, the log analysis of
the without-guide group included 152 participants, while the
questionnaire analysis included 144 participants. Out of the
144 participants, 65 were males and 79 were females. The age
of the visitors ranged from 9 to 81 with an average of 43.4
(SD = 19.5). Fifty-five of the visitors have visited the Hecht
museum before, whereas 89 did not.

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

of isolation might not have an effect on the proximity
patterns or affect the way group members circulate as a
group in the museum. We expect to be able to validate
these suggestions by measuring proximity of visitors to
their peers. We hypothesize that people in groups not
using the guide will be more in proximity to each other
than people coming in groups who use the guide (i.e. the
guide will cause a greater physical separation between
members of the group).
(5) In general, visitors using the mobile guide would be
more satisfied with their visit than visitors without a
mobile guide. Deployments of mobile guides show
general satisfaction with the use of the guide (Bird,
2007; Cheverst et al., 2000a). We expect that this
satisfaction is not only due to the novelty of these guides,
but that, in general, visitors using the guide would be
more satisfied with their visit than visitors who did not
use a mobile guide.

Influence of a Location-aware Mobile Guide
A t-test examining the differences in age between the two
groups did not find significant differences, indicating random
distribution of age between the two study groups.

5. RESULTS
We report on the analysis of system usage and user behavior
in the museum stemming from the log visits data and visitors’
attitudes as analyzed from the questionnaires. We begin with a
look at general visit behavior of the two study groups. Next we
take a deeper analysis from the exhibit point of view. We then
focus on group analysis, comparing groups that visited the
museum with and without a mobile guide. Finally, we compare
subjective visitor attitudes.
General behavior

In the following analyses, we conducted an analysis of
covariance (ANCOVA) in order to examine the effect that
visit type (with or without the guide) had on the total visit
time, number of location visited and average time in location,
taking into account the age, gender and previous visit (whether
participants previously visited the museum or not) of the
participants.
5.1.1. Total visit time
The total time varied with a minimum visit time of 15 min
and a maximum visit time of 239 min. The average visit time
for the combined two groups was 59.2 min. Comparing the
two groups shows that when using the guide visitors visit
the museum 65 min on average, compared with 49.6 min on
average for a visit without the guide. A one-way ANCOVA
was used to assess the total time differences between the two
groups, taking into account the age, gender and previous visit.
Results confirmed that participants visiting the museum with a
mobile visitors guide visited the museum significantly longer
(M = 65 min; SD = 32.9) than visitors visiting without
the guide (M = 49.6 min; SD = 29), F (1, 401) = 16.6.
P < 0.001. No effect was found for age, gender or previous
visit.
5.1.2. Number of locations visited
On average, visitors using the mobile guide visited more
locations (M = 16.03, SD = 7.3) than visitors without the
guide (M = 13.98, SD = 8.01). Because this result is likely
to be influenced by the fact that visitors using the guide spent
more time at the museum than visitors without the guide, we
continued and compared the rate of the location visited (and
indirectly compare the pace of the visitors) in each condition.
We therefore normalized these results for a 1-h visit. Results
of the ANCOVA indicate that visitors who used the mobile
guide visited fewer locations per hour (M = 16.51; SD = 7.4)
than visitors who did not use the mobile guide (M = 21.37;
SD = 14.1; F (1, 401) = 23.85, P < 0.001). Interestingly, the

analysis revealed a marginally significant effect for returning
visitors on the number of location visited, F (1, 401) = 3.64,
P = 0.057, with returning visitors (M = 17.2; SD = 7.7)
visiting fewer locations than new visitors (M = 18.7; SD =
12.2). These results are in conjunction of the results reported in
Lanir et al. (2011) of the differences in behavior between new
and returning visitors.
We conclude that although, in total, visitors with the guide
visited more locations, their overall pace was slower than
visitors without the guide.
5.1.3. Average time in a location
We calculated the average time a visitor spent in a location.
Locations were defined as museum exhibits where we had
a beacon installed on (there were 45 such exhibits, which
included most major exhibits in the museum). Results indicate
that visitors who used the mobile guide spent more time in
these locations (M = 89.9 s, SD = 57.8) than visitors who
did not use the mobile guide (M = 31.4 s, SD = 24.8),
F (1, 401) = 132.8, P < 0.001.
To further examine visitor average time in locations, for the
with-guide group, we calculated the time visitors spent at a
location removing the time visitors listened to presentations. We
hypothesized that the guide might cause visitors to spend extra
time in marked exhibits, even beyond using the guide, because
of the stimulation caused by the guide. We found that, on
average, visitors spent 48.4% of their time at locations listening
to presentations. After removing the listening-to-presentation
time, visitors using the guide spent an average of 47.5 s in
an exhibit (SD = 39.9). A statistical test comparing this
result with time spent at an exhibit of visitors who did not
use the guide (M = 31.4 s, SD = 24.8, as stated before)
showed that this difference was significant, F (1, 401) = 11.3,
p < 0.001. To further investigate the time spent in a location, we
aggregated the data according to locations as reported in the next
section.
5.2. Analysis per exhibit
To examine the holding and attracting power of exhibits, we
aggregated and analyzed the data per exhibit. There were a
total of 45 instrumented exhibits in the museum for which we
measured the amount of visitors and the total time spent for
each exhibit.
To examine the holding power of exhibits, for each exhibit
we calculated the average time that visitors spent at that exhibit
(only for visitors who were detected at the exhibit). A paired
t-test of the amount of time spent in an exhibit showed that
visitors who did not use the guide spent less time in an exhibit
(M = 29.3 s, SD = 20.6) than for those who used the guide
(M = 80.13 s, SD = 32), t (44) = 16.82, p < 0.001,
supporting the notion that the guide increases the holding power
of these exhibits. It is interesting to note the high standard
deviation of time spent in an exhibit for visitors using the guide

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

5.1.

9

10

Joel Lanir et al.
5.3.

Group analysis

5.3.1. Proximity to other group members
We analyzed interaction within groups of visitors arriving to the
museum together in order to understand group behavior with
and without the guide. We compared the amount of time group
members spent together, in order to see whether the mobile
guide encourages or inhibits group interaction. Proximity of
group members was measured by examining each visitor’s
Blind data on proximity to other Blinds. This information was
augmented by Beacon data (if two visitors were detected at the
same Beacon at the same time, we assumed they are in close
proximity).
Visitors in different group sizes behave differently. For
example, while for a group of two, the pair can either be together
or not, with a group of three visitors, each member can be
separate, there can be two visitors walking together while the
third walks separately, or the three visitors can walk together.
With a group of four, there are even more options. Therefore, we
separated the following analyses according to the group size. In
regards to the without-guide groups, each group member wore
a Blind and was tracked. As for the with-guide groups, each
of the group members used a mobile guide (and therefore also
wearing a Blind). In some cases, a group came and only some
members of the groups used a mobile guide (for example, a pair
of visitors in which only one person wanted to use a mobile
guide). We did not include these cases in the analysis, because
we did not record tracking data for users who did not use the
mobile guide in this group. Table 1 summarizes the results of
the group analysis.

Figure 4. Average time in seconds a visitor spent with and without the guide (holding power) in all exhibits sorted according to time spent with
the guide (left) and in five leading exhibits of the Hecht museum as determined by the museum curator (right).

Figure 5. Percentage of visitors that attended an exhibit (attraction power) with and without the guide in all exhibits sorted according to attraction
power with the guide (left), and for five leading exhibits in the Hecht museum (right).

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

(M = 106.9), calculated across exhibits. This emphasizes that
not only did visitors stay longer at exhibits, but also that visitor’s
behavior with the guide varied quite a lot, with some visitors
spending much time at locations while others simply passing by.
Figure 4 shows the holding power with and without the guide
in all of the exhibits sorted from high to low according to the
time spent with the guide (left) and the holding power of five
main exhibits in the museum as determined by the museum’s
curator (right). We can see that the holding power of most
exhibits doubled and sometimes more than tripled by using
the guide.
To examine the attraction power of each exhibit, we
calculated the percentage of visitors who visited each exhibit out
of the total number of visitors for the two groups. We examined
only instrumented exhibits (see Fig. 3); however, these included
all major museum highlights as defined by the museum curator.
A paired t-test of the percentage of visitors attending an exhibit
showed a significant difference between visitors who did not use
the guide (M = 27.6, SD = 17.6) and visitors who used the
guide (M = 33.7, SD = 27.6), t (44) = 6.08, P < 0.001,
supporting the notion that the guide increases the attraction
power of these exhibits. Figure 5 presents the attraction power
of all exhibits sorted from high to low according to attraction
power with the guide (left) and the attraction power of the five
main exhibits (right). We see that while the attraction power of
most exhibits increased, this increase was much more moderate
compared with the difference in holding time, and in some cases
(such as the Coins exhibit) there was almost no increase in
attraction power at all.

11

Influence of a Location-aware Mobile Guide
Table 1. Percentage of time pairs were in proximity (average of all combinations of
pairs in the group), and percentage when the entire group members were in proximity
according to the group size.
With guide
Group size
2
3
4

n
41
3
6

Pairs (%)
24.34
17.6
15.6

Without guide

All group (%)
13.1
9.2

We first looked at visitors who came to the museum in pairs.
We examined a total of 39 pairs who visited the museum without
the guide and 41 pairs who visited the museum with a guide.
We measured proximity of the pairs to each other, i.e. how
much time out of the entire visit was the pair in proximity.
Results indicate that without the guide pairs of visitors spent
more time in proximity (M = 41.35%, SD = 23.8) than with
the guide (M = 24.34%, SD = 18.06), F (1, 78) = 13.029,
P = 0.001 (Fig. 6). We also measured the amount of times
each pair separated, where a separation was defined as a pair
not being in proximity for more than 10 s. Pairs without the
guide separated slightly less per hour (M = 11.31, SD = 9.8)
than pairs with the guide (M = 12.6, SD = 6.9); however, this
difference was not significant, F (1, 78) = 0.484, P = NS.
Next, we looked at groups of three visitors arriving together.
There were only three groups of three visitors who visited
the museum with guides and four groups of three visitors
who visited the museum without guides. Because of the low
number of groups, we did not conduct a statistical analysis but
simply report the descriptive results. For each group of three,
we measured both the proximity of all three visitors (i.e. when
all three visitors were in proximity at a given time) and the
proximity of each pair resulting in three pair-proximity results
for each group. In the ‘with-guide’ group, all three visitors were
in proximity 13.1% of the time (n = 3). Looking at pairs,
visitors in groups of three were in proximity to at least one
member of their group on an average of 17.6% of the time

Pairs (%)
41.35
34.4
37.0

All group (%)
28.2
12.4

(n = 9, SD = 11.6). With the ‘no-guide’ group, all three
visitors were in proximity 28.21% of the time (n = 4). On
average, visitors were in proximity to at least one member of
their group 34.4% of the time (n = 12, SD = 15.3).
Concerning groups of four visitors, there were six such
groups using the guide and three such groups without the guide.
For each group, we looked at the proximity of all four members
at any given time and the proximity of all possible pairs (six pairs
for each group of four). In the ‘with-guide’ group, all members
were in proximity 9.2% of the time (n = 6). Looking at pairs,
visitors in groups of four were in proximity to each member
of the group on an average of 15.6% of the time (n = 36,
SD = 11.4). In the ‘without-guide’ group, all members were in
proximity 12.4% of the time (n = 3) while each member was
in proximity to each other member of the group on an average
of 37.03% of the time (n = 18, SD = 30.7).
Finally, to see whether these patterns change when people
are engaged with exhibits, we filtered the data and looked only
at the proximity to other group members when near an exhibit.
Results are similar to the ones we already reported: when near
exhibits, without the guide pairs of visitors spent more time
in proximity to their friends (M = 21.5%, SD = 21.5) than
with the guide (M = 10.6%, SD = 7.39), F (1, 78) = 6.40,
P = 0.014.
Summarizing these results, we see that visitors visiting
in groups were substantially more together (often twice as
much!) when not using the guide than when using the guide.
These results were significant for pairs of visitors, and this
trend continued for larger group sizes of three and four
visitors.
5.3.2. Talking to other group members
During the study, we managed to upgrade three Blinds with
embedded microphones that measure noise levels (without
actually recording conversation for privacy reasons). We were
interested in comparing the amount of talk between groups of
visitors using and not using the mobile guide. Because we had
only three Blinds with microphones, and started measuring
microphone data at the end of our study, our data includes
only 17 visitors using the guide and 29 visitors not using the
guide who came in groups and used one of the Blinds with
microphones.

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

Figure 6. The percentage of time pairs without the guide (n = 39)
and with the guide (n = 41) were in proximity to each other. Error
bars display 95% confidence interval.

n
39
4
3

12

Joel Lanir et al.

We measured the percentage of the time that the microphones
detected talking. On average, visitors using the guide talked
less (M = 9.11% of the time, SD = 6.2) than visitors who
did not use the guide (M = 11.62%, SD = 10.59). However,
this difference was not significant, F (1, 44) = 0.78, P = NS.
Looking at the data, and taking into account the high variance
(i.e. there are group of visitors who talked a lot, and those who
did not talk at all), we believe that these data indicate a trend
which would become significant given a larger sample.
5.4.

Informal observations

5.5. Visitor attitudes
Following the visit, we presented visitors with a set of
statements and asked them to use a 7-point Likert scale to
indicate how much they agreed with each statement, ranging
from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (7). Table 2 presents
these statements as well as visitors’ average responses for both
groups (with-guide and without-guide) for visitors who came
alone and for visitors who came in groups. With ranked ordinal
data and a relatively small sample size, it is recommended to
use a nonparametric statistical test (Huck et al., 1974). We
therefore used the Mann–Whitney U nonparametric test to
examine differences in ranking between the groups (with vs.
without guide) and to examine differences between visitors
visiting alone and in groups.
We first compared between the with-guide and without-guide
groups on ratings of all visitors. As can be seen in Table 2,
visitors rated the statements ‘I would like to visit the Hecht
museum again’, and ‘I was happy with the visit’ slightly higher
in the with-guide group. However, these differences were not
significant. Visitors also felt that they learned during the visit

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

During the 10 months of deployment, we have informally
observed many visitors during their museum visit, both
individuals and groups, both using the mobile guide and without
it. We also gathered visitors’ qualitative feedback using openended questions, in order to be able to further understand
visitor’s opinions and attitudes toward the use of the guide. In
the post-visit questionnaire, we asked visitors to state what were
the advantages and disadvantages of using the mobile guide.
Falk (2009), in his taxonomy of the museum visit experience,
suggests five visitor identity prototypes. The explorer explores
the museum because of curiosity or general interest in
discovering more about the subject matter introduced by the
museum. The experience seeker, often a tourist, is typically
motivated by looking for an enjoyable experience, often looking
for the main attraction the museum. The professional/hobbyist
is interested in specific topics out of the full collection of the
museum collection. the recharger is looking for a place of
atmosphere while the facilitator is interested in facilitating the
visit for someone else. In our observations, we noticed that,
at the Hecht museum, visitors arriving alone were mostly of
the explorer type. These visitors mainly focused their attention
on the exhibits. Explorers (as well as hobbyists) come to
the museum mostly to learn, and therefore carefully examine the
exhibits and the corresponding interpretive aids. Therefore,
the mobile guide, as it was designed, was a perfect aid for these
types of visitors. This is reflected by many positive comments in
the open-ended questions saying that the guide provided more
information (e.g. ‘the guide adds more information on exhibits
beyond the text given in the museum labels’). For the experience
seekers, the guide provided an enhancement of the experience
(e.g. ‘it makes the visit more interesting and stimulating’),
as well as a way to receive self-paced interpretation (‘The
information was available at my own pace’).
Visitors coming in groups can be categorized into those who
mostly focus on the exhibits, those who combine both focus
on exhibits and social interaction between group members and
those who are mostly engaged in social interaction and use
the museum as an ambient space for the social interaction (for
example, a romantic couple who come to the museum mostly
for the atmosphere). It seems that while the mobile guide was a
perfect companion for those focusing on the exhibits (in groups
these were mainly explorers and professionals), it was less

useful for visitors who wanted to combine social aspects in
their visits (rechargers). Indeed, we noticed that groups and
individuals of the recharger types often did not choose to use
the guide, and when they did, either used one device viewing
it together, or limited the use of the guide. The types of groups
also differ according to group composition. While some groups
consisted of two or more adults, many groups consisted of
family members (i.e. one or more adult with one or more kids).
For adults with children, the guide seemed very useful. Often,
the kid took the mobile guide and used it as a way to empower
themselves: leading the way instead of being led by the adult
similar to what was reported by Serrell (1997). In other cases,
the guide acted as an aid for the adults in their facilitator role
(e.g. ‘It is a thing that extends the visit stay and enhances the
interest of the kids’), as well as a way to ‘entertain’ the kids
while allowing the adult to look at the exhibits, transforming
their role from facilitators to explorers.
In terms of interaction with the surroundings, our informal
observations were in par with the results reported above. We
noticed that visitors coming alone were more detached from
their surrounding when using the guide, with their focus mostly
changing between the guide and the exhibits. This is reflected in
a comment: ‘Sometimes it causes one to listen to the guide rather
than experience the artifacts’. Furthermore, as was described in
Section 5.3, we observed that groups of adults often became less
social and less in contact with each other when using the guide.
This was reflected in another comment: ‘It isolated me from
the person I came with’. Nevertheless, most visitors’ comments
were very positive as one visitor commented: ‘You can visit the
museum on your own pace. It’s a wonderful way of allowing
people to go and see what attracts their attention without being
in an organized group’.

Q17

5.98 (1.40)
6.06 (1.19)
5.54 (1.37)
6.22 (1.11)
6.13 (1.18)
5.95 (1.20)
5.59 (1.39)
6.06 (0.94)
6.03 (1.36)
6.03 (1.19)
5.56 (1.36)**
6.16 (1.06)
Bold denotes significant differences
* denotes significant differences between bisitors visiting alone and visitors visiting in groups
** denotes differences between the with-guide and without-guide groups

6.26 (1.36)
6.08 (1.17)*
6.02 (1.43)
6.29 (1.04)
6.18 (1.41)
5.94 (1.28)
5.90 (1.46)**
6.23 (1.22)

6.08 (1.48)
5.75 (1.40)*
5.73 (1.49)
6.15 (1.39)

5.50 (1.56)
5.53 (1.47)
5.51 (1.52)
5.34 (1.76)

I felt that I control where I go to and what I see in
the museum
I would like to visit the Hecht museum again
The visit was fun
I learned a lot during the visit
I was happy with the visit to the Hecht museum

5.32 (1.74)

5.30 (1.72)

groups (n = 89)
alone (n = 51)
(n = 140)
(n = 133)
(n = 242)

groups (n = 107)

Visitors in
Visiting
Visiting alone
Statement

All visitors

Visitors in

All visitors

Without guide
With guide

13

more with the guide than without the guide. This difference was
significant (U = 106, P = 0.036). This result makes sense,
as the mobile guide was very didactic in nature, explaining
different aspects of each exhibit. It is known that many visitors
do not like to read long labels (McManus, 1989). These visitors’
learning ability benefits from a visual-audio mobile guide.
Comparisons of the other statements (comparing all visitors
with and without the guide) did not reveal significant results.
Although not significant, it is interesting to note that people felt
less in control regarding where to go and what to see with the
mobile guide compared with without it. This relates to Lanir
et al. (2011) who showed that proactiveness of a mobile guide
may reduce the amount of control that a user perceives.
Next, we compared between the ratings of visitors who
came to the museum alone and visitors who came to the
museum in groups for each condition. Looking at the withguide condition, we see that except for the first statement (that
deals with control as opposed to the other statements that deal
with user experience), on all other statements, visitors who
visited alone had higher ratings than visitors who visited in
groups. Statistical tests using the Mann–Whitney test showed
a significant difference for the statement ‘The visit was fun’
(U = 114, P = 0.043), indicating that visitors enjoyed the
guide more when they were alone rather than being in a group.
In other cases, there was a marginally significant difference
for the statement ‘I learned a lot during the visit’ (U = 241,
P = 0.070), suggesting that visitors using the guide felt they
learned more when they were alone rather than when they
were in groups. Tests on all other statements did not yield
significant results. Looking at the without-guide condition,
statistical tests did not yield significant results between visitors
visiting alone and visitors visiting in groups on any of the
statements.

6. DISCUSSION
Results clearly indicate that the use of the mobile guide affected
museum visitor’s behavior.Visitors using the mobile guide spent
more time in the museum and spent less time in proximity to
their group members. In addition, both the attraction power and
the holding power of the marked exhibits increased for visitors
using the guide. Next, we discuss our major findings.
6.1.

Impact of technology on the museum visit

6.1.1. Using a mobile guide increased visit time
The fact that using the mobile guide increased visitors’ time
in the museum by 31% (a difference which was significant)
is encouraging for advocates of mobile guides. Although a
longer visit does not always mean a better visitor experience,
the time spent in the museum is often deemed an indicator of
learning (Serrell, 1997; Falk and Dierking, 2000), and spending
more time in the museum is often a target goal for museum

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

Table 2. Visitors’ average ratings (and standard deviation) with and without the guide for all visitors and for visitors who came in groups of several statements. Ratings are
given on a 7-point Likert scale.

Influence of a Location-aware Mobile Guide

14

Joel Lanir et al.

6.1.2. The mobile guide monopolized visitor’s time
Results indicate that using a mobile guide increased both the
attraction power and the holding power of the marked exhibits.
We saw that the guide has substantially increased the holding
power, on average by 173%. Although we expected holding
power to increase when using the guide, we were surprised
by this large increase. This difference is no doubt due to the
time spent by visitors listening to the guide’s presentations. We
believe that the engaging and different modality of interpretation
method caused visitors to spend much more time in front of
exhibits that provide multimedia content.
We also saw that the guide has increased the attraction power
of the marked exhibit (by an average of 22%). This means that
out of the total number of visitors, a higher rate of visitors visited
the marked exhibits using the guide than those who did not use
the guide. Exhibits with multimedia content were both marked
by a small sticker near the exhibit, and highlighted on a map in
the mobile guide. Visitors using the guide were more attracted to
exhibits in which there was electronic interpretation, and were
probably looking for these exhibits. It seems that the guide
contributed toward bringing more people to marked exhibits,
and once a visitor came to these spots, the guide kept them
there as indicated by the holding power. Furthermore, we saw
that even when removing time spent listening to presentations,
visitors spent more time at the marked exhibits, suggesting
that the guide caused visitors to be more engaged with the
exhibits themselves (and not only with the guide). These results
have strong implications for museum curators and mobile guide
designers. Introducing a mobile guide to the museum affects
visitor behavior in a strong way. Visitors using the guide are
more attracted to exhibits that have electronic interpretation

and spend much more time there. For these visitors, this might
come in exchange for time spent in other exhibits. Electronically
enhanced exhibits (that have mobile multimedia interpretation)
should be therefore carefully chosen in such a way that is insync with the museum’s commercial, educational and overall
goals.

6.1.3. The use of the guide disrupted the social interaction of
visitors coming in a group
A major finding of this study is the evidence shown on the
effect that using a mobile guide has on groups of visitors.
While previous evidence on the isolation effect that a guide
might have were based on ethnographic observations of a small
number (10–15) of individual visitors (Hsi, 2003; Bellotti et al.,
2002), or simply noted the risk without providing any support
(Angliss, 2006a,b), our findings based on empirical analysis of
a large number of groups leave no doubt regarding this effect
(as well as quantify it). We have shown that when using the
guide, small groups of visitors of various sizes arriving together
spent less time (often half as much) in proximity with each
other. Visitors in these groups also talked less with each other,
although the difference in talking was not significant. Since
proximity to other group members as well as amount of verbal
communication are used as measures for social interaction
in the museum (Leinhardt and Knutson, 2004; McManus,
1988), this provides strong empirical support to the suggestions
made (Grinter et al., 2002; Kuflik et al., 2011a,b) regarding
the de-socializing effect that a mobile guide might have on
groups. These findings are substantiated when looking at the
subjective results of visitors who used the guide. We see in the
questionnaire results, that visitors using the guide and visiting
alone rated the guide higher (on all statements) than visitors
using the guide who came in groups. Furthermore, users who
did not use a guide had more fun visiting in groups than visiting
alone (as suggested in Leinhardt and Knutson, 2004), while
visitors who used the guide had more fun using it alone rather
than in a group.
It seems that using a mobile visitors’ guide might put
individual visitors in a ‘technological bubble’ making it difficult
for them to keep track of their companions or family members,
and converse about what they see (Luyten et al., 2006). This
might be similar to the way a person listening to music on
an iPod (e.g. on a bus, or on a subway) is detached from
the surroundings. There is a paradox here. On the one hand,
visitors want to use a mobile guide in order to receive richer
and personalized content that assists them in learning and
understanding the museum exhibits better. On the other hand,
we saw that this use decouples the group and forces visitors
into a ‘technological bubble’ in which visitors are in less social
contact with their group members. Therefore, while a guide
provides a better connection to the museum content, this comes
at the expense of hindering social interaction, which is important
to the learning process.

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

curators (although it can be noted that commercially oriented
museums may wish for a higher circulation and therefore would
prefer visitors to move faster through the museum). This is also
supported by the subjective questionnaire results that indicate
that visitors who used the guide felt they learned more during the
visit than visitors who did not use the guide (although there is
no statistically significant support to indicate that the increased
learning resulted in an increase in visitor experience in terms of
satisfaction or ‘fun’).
An interesting observation is that when using the guide,
together with an increase in the subjective impression of
learning there is a slight increase in satisfaction and wish to
come back to the museum (compared with not using a guide).
The reason for this increase seems to come from a different
source than many would expect. The subjective data suggest
that it is not caused by the fun experienced with using the
electronic device, but rather the perceived benefit seems to
come from using a tool perceived as a serious companion (i.e.
enhancing learning). It is also possible that the limited fun is a
consequence of isolation, due to limited interaction with others
stemming from the individual-oriented technology as discussed
further on.

Influence of a Location-aware Mobile Guide
6.2.

Increasing social interaction

15

device to the shared screen, similar to the work that has been
done by Rocchi et al. (2004).
6.3.

Limitations and reflections

The study has a number of limitations. First, our analysis
depends on the quality and reliability of our instrumentation (i.e.
the positioning system). While the positioning system generally
worked as expected, we did notice that there were some lapses
in Blind positioning messages arriving to the server (i.e. each
Blind sends two messages per second, however some messages
got lost). Similarly, proximity of two Blinds can be missed
when Blinds are shielded by other visitors or when visitors
are standing back to back. To ensure that it did not impair the
positioning analysis, we applied smoothing algorithms (filling
up gaps in positioning) and redundancy mechanisms (proximity
of group members were decided both by Blinds detecting other
Blinds and by simultaneous detection of Blinds by a single
Beacon). Secondly, our indoor positioning system does not
provide continuous tracking over the entire museum but rather
location-based positioning in 45 major exhibits (as determined
by the museum curator). While RF-based positioning is an
acceptable solution for museums (Kuflik et al., 2011a,b), we do
not have information on visitor behavior in other, possibly less
popular, exhibits. Thirdly, our analysis is based on quantitative
data gathered through the system logs. However, it is difficult
to deduce behavioral reasoning from log file analysis by itself.
In order to understand why people behave in such a way (i.e.
why visitors were in less proximity to their peers when using the
guide), these data need to be augmented with qualitative data in
terms of observations of visitors in the museum and interviews.
Finally, the results of this study are dependent on the specific
design and implementation of the mobile guide as well as the
specific museum used in the study. The time spent using the
guide depends both on the quality of information provided
and on the user interface and user experience when using the
guide. For example, the design of our guide provides a list
of questions from which the user chooses one or more 1-min
presentations for viewing (see Fig. 1). From the log data, we
saw that most visitors saw one or two presentations in a location
where they interacted with the guide, with few visitors stopping
a presentation in the middle. This translates to between 60 and
120 s of using the guide at those locations. Had we designed the
presentations to be shorter, the holding power of the guide might
have been smaller. Furthermore, the content presented in the
presentations was mostly of didactic nature. It contained verbal
explanations and interpretations of the exhibits in the museum
augmented by visual images. As such, the visitor, after choosing
the content, passively views the presentations. Other designs
of mobile guides might be more interactive, playful or group
oriented, and thus might enable different types of interaction.
This brings us to a final important point. The current guide
was designed in the spirit and as an extension of a classical
audio museum guide. In a classic audio guide, the visitor

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

There is no doubt about the fact that the use of personal mobile
technology is increasing dramatically. Particularly, in cultural
heritage, many sites and museums offer interpretation options
using either a dedicated mobile guide or information provided
to the visitors’ personal hand-held device. Given the negative
social effect as shown here and the emphasis many museum
researchers put on group experience and group learning for the
overall visitor experience (Dierking and Falk, 1994; Leinhardt
and Knutson, 2004; McManus, 1988), it is important to mitigate
this dilemma. One way is by further investigating ways in which
technology can enhance rather than reduce group experience.
Several studies, including Luyten et al. (2006), Dini et al.
(2007) and Hornecker (2008), have looked into using museum
technology for groups. Of these, with the exception of games
(Luyten et al., 2006; Ghiani et al., 2009), few have looked into
directly using mobile guides for the benefit of groups or support
of social interaction (Callaway et al., 2011; Cheverst et al.,
2000b; Grinter et al., 2002; Kuflik et al., 2011a,b). We believe
that it is important to continue and examine other methods
that enable both personalized, multimedia content and group
support in the museum. One such promising direction is the
use of shared mobile displays. We noticed that, in some cases,
groups of visitors took only one iPod device and shared its
view (these groups were not included in this study in order
to not confound the results). These groups of visitors walked
together in the museum, and watched the presentations and
content together using the iPod’s speaker. While this solution
was not ideal because of the small screen, and the low volume
of the speaker (and possibly it also bothered other visitors),
it was still preferred by some groups over using individual
iPods and thus decoupling the group. A simple enhancement
of this idea using a larger screen (such as a tablet, or a mobile
projector), and duplicate earphones (possibly wireless), may
substantially improve these visitors’ experience. And if offered
as a possible museum solution, we believe that many visitors
would prefer this choice. Further research should examine
whether mobile shared displays in the form of tablets or a
mobile projector are a viable solution for small groups of people
in the museum.
Another possible option is to use navigational support
and recommendation capabilities in order for the system to
proactively suggest group-oriented ideas to visitors who split.
For example, the system can recommend places of mutual
interest as meeting places and refer visitors to group members
that expressed interest in exhibits that seem of interest to
them (an extension of the personal context-aware messages
mechanism suggested by Kuflik et al. (2011a,b)). Finally, large
displays located at various locations in the museum can be used
by small groups to collaboratively view interpretive information
rather than view it individually, and thus keep the group intact.
This will entail development of interaction techniques that
would transfer attention and information from the personal

16

Joel Lanir et al.

7. CONCLUSIONS
The use of a mobile guide significantly changed the way visitors
behave in the museum. While some of the changes, such as
the increased time spent in the museum, can be considered
beneficial, other changes, such as the increased attention
of electronically interpreted exhibits, need to be carefully
considered by museum curators regarding how this change
will affect the visitor’s entire experience. We have presented
empirical evidence to support the notion that an electronic
museum guide detaches the visitor from his or her group. Since
museum researchers agree that the social aspects of the visit are a
central part of the museum visit experience, especially for those
who come in groups, this should indicate for museum curators
to proceed with caution and provide a challenge for researchers
and mobile guide designers. Further efforts should be made to
design mobile interpretation aids that would retain the benefits
of the mobile guide while keeping, or even increasing, group
cohesiveness and group communication. Finally, we discussed
the potential of the technology to encourage group interaction,
as a way to overcome the isolation caused by the use of
individual devices and pointed out to various technological
solutions demonstrating this potential.

Angliss, S. (2006a) Talking sense. Mus. Pract. Mag., 34, 46–47.
Angliss, S. (2006b) Sound and vision. Mus. Pract. Mag., 34, 51–52.
Aoki, P.M., Grinter, R.E., Hurst, A., Szymanski, M.H., Thornton, J.D.
and Woodruff, A. (2002) Sotto Voce: Exploring the Interplay of
Conversation and Mobile Audio Spaces. In Proc. SIGCHI Conf.
Hum. Factors Comput. Syst. Changing Our World, Changing
Ourselves, pp. 431–438. ACM Press, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
Ardissono, L., Kuflik, T. and Petrelli, D. (2011) Personalization in
cultural heritage: the road travelled and the one ahead. User Model.
User-Adapt. Interact., 22, 1–27.
Baus, J., Cheverst, K. and Kray, C.A (2005) Survey of Mapbased Mobile Guides. In Zipf, A., Meng, L. and Reichenbacher,
T. (eds), Map Based Mobile Services—Theories, Methods and
Implementations. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, Germany.
Bell, P. (2009) Learning Science in Informal Environments: People,
Places, and Pursuits. National Academy Press, Washington DC,
USA.
Bellotti, F., Berta, C., De Gloria, A. and Margarone, M. (2002) User
testing a hypermedia tour guide. Pervasive Computing, 1(2), 33–41.
IEEE Computer Society.
Billings, S. (2009) Upwardly mobile. Mus. Pract., 46, 30–34.
Bird, S. (2007) Deploying and Assessing the Impact of Audio Guides at
the Roman Baths, Bath, UK. In McLoughlin, J., Kaminski, J. and
Sodagar, B. (eds), Technology Strategy, Management and Socioeconomic Impact, Heritage Management Series, vol. 2, pp. 109–
121. Archaeolingua, Budapest, Hungary.
Bitgood, S. (1992) Visitor orientation and circulation: some general
principles. Visit. Behav., 8, 15–16.
Bitgood, S. (2006) An analysis of visitor circulation: movement
patterns and the general value principle. Curator, 49, 463–475.
Bitgood, S. (2009) When is “Museum fatigue” not fatigue? Curator,
52, 193–202.
Bitgood, S. and Shettel, H.H. (1996) An overview of visitor studies.
J. Mus. Educ., 21, 6–10.
Bollo, A. and Dal Pozzolo, L. (2005) Analysis of Visitor Behaviour
Inside the Museum: An Empirical Study. In Proc. 8th Int. Conf.
Arts and Cultural Management, Montreal.
Callaway, C., Stock, O., Dekoven, E., Noy, K., Citron, Y. and Dobrin,
Y. (2011) Mobile Drama in an Instrumented Museum: Inducing
Group Conversation via Coordinated Narratives. In Proc. 16th Int.
Conf. Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 73–82. ACM Press, Palo Alto,
CA, USA.
Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Mitchell, K. and Friday, A. (2000a)
Experiences of Developing and Deploying a Context-aware Tourist
Guide: The GUIDE Project. In Proc. 6th Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile
Comput. Netw., pp. 20–31. ACM Press, New York.

REFERENCES

Cheverst, K., Davies, N., Mitchell, K., Friday, A. and Efstratiou, C.
(2000b) Developing a Context-aware Electronic Tourist Guide:
Some Issues and Experiences. In Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Hum. Factors
Comput. Syst., pp. 17–24. ACM Press, The Hague, Netherlands.

Alfaro, I., Nardon, M., Pianesi, F., Stock, O. and Zancanaro, M. (2005)
Using cinematic techniques on mobile devices for cultural tourism.
Inf. Technol. Tour., 7, 61–71.

Ciavarella, C. and Paterno, F. (2004) The design of a handheld,
location-aware guide for indoor environments. Pers. Ubiquitous
Comput., 8, 82–91.

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

arrives at an exhibit, chooses a number that is shown on the
exhibit which ties the guide to the exhibit and listens to an
audio interpretation. While the guide used in the current study
has many advanced aspects such as location-awareness, video
images, multiple options for each location and other advanced
services (such as navigation), its basic function (providing
didactic interpretation) is similar in nature. Both a classic audio
guide and our guide are mostly designed to accommodate a
single user. The personal nature of a hand-held device, having
a small screen and affording input from one person, as well
as the way it was designed makes it a difficult to use in
support of a small group of visitors, causing the negative social
effect reported in this study. We believe that the results of this
study generalize to most conventional information-per-location
type of museum mobile guides. The guide was designed to
provide general, didactic type of information for the 45 major
locations in the museum, with the content and design written
and supervised by the museum curator. As such, it is similar
in nature to most guides available in museums today. However,
novel artifacts for exploring the museum of different nature,
which are designed to support small groups such as reported in
Aoki et al. (2002), Dini et al. (2007) and Callaway et al. (2011),
might show different results in regards to social interaction.

Influence of a Location-aware Mobile Guide
Cohen, E. (1985) The tourist guide: the origins, structure and dynamics
of a role. Ann. Tour. Res., 12, 5–29.
Dierking, L.D. and Falk, J.H. (1994) Family behavior and learning in
informal science settings: a review of the research. Sci. Educ., 78,
57–72.
Dim, E. and Kuflik, T. (2009) Group Situational Awareness: Being
Together. In Workshop on Personalization in Mobile and Pervasive
Computing, in Conjunction with UMAP 2009. Trento, Italy.
Dim, E. and Kuflik, T. (2010) Social Signal Processing: Detecting
Small Group Interaction in Leisure Activity. In Proc. 14th Int. Conf.
Intel. User Interf., pp. 309–312. Hong Kong, China.

Emmanouilidis, C., Koutsiamanis, R.-A. and Tasidou, A. (2012)
Mobile guides: taxonomy of architectures, context awareness,
technologies and applications. J. Netw. Comput. Appl., 36(1),
103–125.
Falk, J.H. (2009) Identity and the Museum Visitor Experience. Left
Coast Press, Walnut Creek, CA.
Falk, J.H. and Dierking, L.D. (2000) Learning from Museums: Visitor
Experiences and the Making of Meaning. Altamira Press, Lanham,
MD, USA.

Kjeldskov, J., Graham, C., Pedell, S., Vetere, F., Howard, S., Balbo, S.
and Davies, J. (2005) Evaluating the usability of a mobile guide:
The influence of location, participants and resources. Behav. Inf.
Technol., 24, 51–65.
Klein, H.J. (1993) Tracking visitor circulation in museum settings.
Environ. Behav., 25, 782.
Krüger, A., Baus, J., Heckmann, D., Kruppa, M. and Wasinger, R.
(2007) Adaptive Mobile Guides. In Brusilovsky, P., Kobsa, A. and
Nejdl, W. (eds), The Adaptive Web, pp. 521–549. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, New York.
Kuflik, T., Lanir, J., Dim, E., Wecker, A., Corra, M., Zancanaro, M. and
Stock, O. (2011a) Indoor Positioning: Challenges and Solutions for
Indoor Cultural Heritage Sites. In Proc. 15th Int. Conf. Intel. User
Interfaces, pp. 375–378. ACM Press, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
Kuflik, T., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., Gorfinkel, A., Jbara, S., Kats,
S. and Kashtan, N. (2011b) A visitor’s guide in an active museum:
Presentations, communications, and reflection. J. Comput. Cultural
Heritage (JOCCH), 3, 11.
Lanir, J., Kuflik, T., Wecker, A.J., Stock, O. and Zancanaro, M. (2011)
Examining proactiveness and choice in a location-aware mobile
museum guide. Interact. Comput., 23, 513–524.
Leinhardt, G. and Knutson, K. (2004) Listening in on Museum
Conversations. Altamira Press, Walnut Creek, CA, USA.

Gammon, B. and Burch, A. (2008) Designing Mobile Digital
Experiences. In Tallen, L. and Walker, K. (eds), Digital
Technologies and the Museum Experience: Handheld Guides and
Other Media, pp. 35–62. Altmira Press, Lanham, MD, USA.

Luyten, K., Van Loon, H., Teunkens, D., Gabriëls, K., Coninx,
K. and Manshoven, E. (2006) ARCHIE: Disclosing a Museum
by a Socially-aware Mobile Guide. The E-Volution of IC
Technology in Cultural Heritage. In Papers from the Joint Event
CIPA/VAST/EG/EuroMed Event, pp. 221–226.

Ghiani, G., Paterno, F., Santoro, C. and Spano, L.D. (2009) UbiCicero:
a location-aware, multi-device museum guide. Interact. Comput.,
21(4), 288–303.

Manning, A. and Sims, G. (2004) The Blanton iTour—An Interactive
Handheld Museum Guide Experiment. Museums and the Web,
Charlotte, NC, USA.

Grinter, R.E., Aoki, P.M., Szymanski, M.H., Thornton, J.D., Woodruff,
A. and Hurst, A. (2002) Revisiting the Visit: Understanding How
Technology Can Shape the Museum Visit. In Proc. 2002ACM Conf.
Comput. Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 146–155. ACM Press,
New Orleans, LA, USA.

McManus, P.M. (1988) Good companions: more on the social
determination of learning-related behaviour in a science museum.
Mus. Manag. Curator., 7, 37–44.

Hatala, M. and Wakkary, R. (2005) Ontology-based user modeling
in an augmented audio reality system for museums. User Model.
User-Adapt. Interact., 15, 339–380.

Millonig, A. and Gartner, G. (2011) Identifying motion and interest
patterns of shoppers for developing personalized way finding tools.
J. Locat. Based Serv., 5, 3–21.

Hornecker, E. (2008) ‘I Don’t Understand it Either, But it is Cool’visitor Interactions with a Multi-touch Table in a Museum.
In Horizontal Interactive Human Computer Systems, 3rd IEEE
International Workshop on Tabletop, pp. 113–120. Amsterdam,
Netherlands.

Paganelli, F., Parlanti, D., Francini, N. and Giuli, D. (2009) A SOABased Mobile Guide to Augment Tourists’ Experiences with UserGenerated Content and Third-Party Services. pp. 435–442, 2009.
In 4th Int. Conf. Internet and Web Appl. Serv., 2009. Venice, Italy.

McManus, P.M. (1989) Oh, yes, they do: how museum visitors read
labels and interact with exhibit texts. Curator, 32, 174–189.

Hsi, S. (2003) A study of user experiences mediated by nomadic web
content in a museum. J. Comput. Assist. Learn., 19, 308–319.

Petrelli, D. and Not, E. (2005) User-centred design of flexible
hypermedia for a mobile guide: reflections on the hyperaudio
experience. User Model. User-Adapt. Interact., 15, 303–338.

Huck, S.W., Cormier, W.H. and Bounds, W.G. (1974) Reading
Statistics and Research. Harper & Row, New York.

Proctor, N. and Tellis, C. (2003) The State of the Art in Museum
Handhelds in 2003. Museums and the Web, Charlotte, NC, USA.

Kaasinen, E. (2005) User acceptance of location-aware mobile
guides based on seven field studies. Behav. Inf. Technol., 24,
37–49.

Raptis, D., Tselios, N. and Avouris, N. (2005) Context-based Design of
Mobile Applications for Museums: A Survey of Existing Practices.
In Proc. MobileHCI 2005, Salzburg, Austria, pp. 153–160.

Kenteris, M., Gavalas, D. and Economou, D. (2011) Electronic mobile
guides: a survey. Pers. Ubiquitous Comput. 15, 97–111.

Rocchi, C., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., Kruppa, M. and Kruger,
A. (2004) The Museum Visit: Generating Seamless Personalized

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

Dini, R., Paternò, F. and Santoro, C. (2007) An Environment to Support
Multi-user Interaction and Cooperation for Improving Museum
Visits through Games. In Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Hum. Comput. Int.
Mobile Devices and Services, pp. 515–521. ACM Press, Singapore.

17

18

Joel Lanir et al.
Presentations on Multiple Devices. In Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Intel.
User Interfaces (IUI’04), pp. 316–318. Funchal, Portugal.

Schroyen, J. Gabriëls, K., Teunkens, D., Robert, K., Luyten,
K., Coninx, K. and Manshoven, E. (2009) Beyond Merely
Information Provisioning: A Museum Handheld Guide Based
on Social Activities and Playful Learning. Hasselt University,
Diepenbeek.
Schwinger, W., Grün, Ch., Pröll, B., Retschitzegger, W. and
Schauerhuber, A. (2002) Context-awareness in Mobile Tourism
Guides – A Comprehensive Survey. Technical Report, Johannes
Kepler University Linz, IFS/TK.
Serrell, B. (1997) Paying attention: the duration and allocation of
visitors’ time in museum exhibitions. Curator, 40, 108–113.

Sumi, Y. and Mase, K. (2001) AgentSalon: Facilitating Face-toFace Knowledge Exchange through ConversationsAmong Personal
Agents. In Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Autonomous Agents, pp. 393–400.
ACM Press, Montreal, QC, Canada.
Tallon, L. and Walker, K. (2008) Digital Technologies and the
Museum Experience: Handheld Guides and other Media. Altamira
Press, Lanham, MD, USA.
Veron, E. and Levasseur, M. (1983) Ethnographie de l’exposition.
Centre Georges Pompidou Bibliotheque, public d’Information.
Paris, France.
Vlahakis, V., Ioannidis, N., Karigiannis, J., Tsotros, M., Gounaris, M.,
Stricker, D. and Almeida, L. (2002) Archeoguide: an augmented
reality guide for archaeological sites. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl.,
22, 52–60.

Stephens, S. (2010) The Growth of Mobile Apps. Mus. Pract.
http://www.museumsassociation.org/museum-practice/apps, last
accessed date 21 February 2013.

Yalowitz, S.S. and Bronnenkant, K. (2009) Timing and tracking:
unlocking visitor behavior. Visit. Stud., 12, 47–64.

Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., Busetta, P., Callaway, C., Krüger, A.,
Kruppa, M., Kuflik, T., Not, E. and Rocchi, C. (2007) Adaptive,
intelligent presentation of information for the museum visitor in
PEACH. User Model. User-Adapt. Interact., 17, 257–304.

Zancanaro, M., Kuflik, T., Boger, Z., Goren-Bar, D. and Goldwasser,
D. (2007) Analyzing Museum Visitors’ Behavior Patterns. In Proc.
11th Int. Conf. User Model., 2007, pp. 238–246. Springer, Corfu,
Greece.

Interacting with Computers, 2013

Downloaded from http://iwc.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Haifa on February 24, 2013

Sparacino, F. (2003) Sto(ry)chastics: a Bayesian Network Architecture
for User Modeling and Computational Storytelling for Interactive
Spaces. In Proc. UbiComp 2003: Ubiquitous Computing, pp. 54–
72. Seattle, WA, USA.

Suh, Y., Shin, C., Dow, S., MacIntyre, B. and Woo, W. (2011)
Enhancing and evaluating users’ social experience with a mobile
phone guide applied to cultural heritage. Pers. Ubiquit. Comput.,
15, 649–665.

