See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/311488985

Towards Using Mobile, Head-Worn Displays in Cultural Heritage: User
Requirements and a Research Agenda
Conference Paper · March 2016
DOI: 10.1145/2856767.2856802

CITATIONS

READS

30

241

3 authors, including:
Tsvi Kuflik

Joel Lanir

University of Haifa

University of Haifa

257 PUBLICATIONS 3,440 CITATIONS

78 PUBLICATIONS 950 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Better Understanding of Foot Gestures: An Elicitation Study View project

MultiPresenter View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Joel Lanir on 12 April 2018.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

IUI 2016 • Wearable and Mobile IUI 2

March 7–10, 2016, Sonoma, CA, USA

Towards Using Mobile, Head-Worn Displays in Cultural
Heritage: User Requirements and a Research Agenda
Natalia Vainstein
The University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
tsvikak@is.haifa.ac.il

Tsvi Kuflik
The University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
ylanir@is.haifa.ac.il

ABSTRACT

Joel Lanir
The University of Haifa
Haifa, Israel
nataliashtepa@gmail.com

utilization of HWD technologies allows providing a
wearable AR display without the necessity to hold the guide
and to look at it and without distracting the user from the
real object. In recent years, large numbers of relatively lowcost, see-through smart glasses are appearing. Mirza and
Sarayeddine [13] reviewed state of the art see-through
technologies and the key challenges these technologies face
in order to develop a platform that will enable affordable
HWDs for the consumer market. Their focus is on seethrough technologies for wearable AR displays. Form
factor, cost, ease of use, and display performance are
reported as major challenges for consumer adoption of AR
HWDs. A comparison of the various technologies and how
they relate to these aspects found out that "Of the various
waveguide technologies discussed, the reflective type
seems to be the most promising for large scale consumer
deployment. The main advantages are the lower cost,
plastic substrate, and lack of color issues. Optical
technologies are finally emerging that will enable consumer
oriented wearable AR display products to become a reality
in the near future".

Augmented reality (AR) technology has the potential to
enrich our daily lives in many aspects. One of them is the
museum visit experience. Nowadays, state of the art mobile
museum visitor guides provide us with rich personalized,
context aware information. However, these systems have
one major drawback – they force the visitor to hold the
guide and to look at its screen. The utilization of smartglasses technology allows providing a wearable AR display
without the necessity to hold the guide and to look at it and
without distracting the user from the real object. This paper
describes initial steps towards the implementation of a
head-worn display (HWD) museum visitor guide – the
results of users' requirements elicitation process, the
implementation of a first research prototype and initial
insights gathered during the process.
Author Keywords

Augmented reality; Head-worn display; Museum visitors'
guide.
ACM Classification Keywords

H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human factors,
H.5.1 [Multimedia Information Systems] Artificial,
augmented, and virtual realities, H.5.2 [User Interfaces]
User centered design

This study focus on exploring the potential of HWD to
enhance the museum visit experience. HWD are not new in
the area of CH and museum guides [17]. Still, to date, few
prototype implementations in museums have been
demonstrated ([3] and [15] are two examples), and even
fewer actual HWD guides exist in actual museums. We
follow a user centered design in the development of a HWD
museum guide. Thus, we first aim to fully understand user
requirements for such a guide. We present the opinions of
potential users about the needs and usefulness of a HWD
museum guide, trying to understand also the reasoning and
general guidelines that stem from these requirements. These
requirements drive the development of a smart glasses
museum visitors' guide prototype which later will be
evaluated in a museum setting, with the ultimate goal of
improving the overall museum visit experience.

INTRODUCTION

Wearable technologies have the potential to enrich our daily
lives in many aspects. One of them is the museum visit
experience. Nowadays, state of the art mobile museum
visitor guides enable museums and other cultural heritage
(CH) sites to move away from short textual labels allowing
minimal information near exhibits and providing visitors
with rich, personalized, context-aware multimedia
presentations [1,8]. However, these systems have one major
drawback – they force the visitor to hold the guide and to
focus on its display (or they provide only audio). The
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
IUI'16, March 07-10, 2016, Sonoma, CA, USA
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4137-0/16/03…$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2856767.2856802

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: first we
introduce some related work; next we present the
requirements elicitation and analysis study, followed by a
description of an initial prototype that was developed and
lessons learned in the process. Finally, we describe the
future evaluation of the system, planned to take place in a
realistic setting.

327

IUI 2016 • Wearable and Mobile IUI 2

March 7–10, 2016, Sonoma, CA, USA

BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

of time the visitors spent focusing on the paintings.
Banowosari et al. [3] briefly presented a design concept of
an AR application using smart-glasses for the Indonesia
Wayang Museum, suggesting some guidelines for
presentation preparation and interaction.

The museum is a unique area for experimentation with
novel, mobile technology, as described in [1]. AR and VR
were already experimented in museums more than twenty
years ago [16], however, only in recent years, with the
appearance of commercial small, light-weight wearable
devices, the potential of HWDs in museums has started to
materialize. Past studies were carried out to evaluate the
potential contribution of HWDs and AR to the field of CH.
Damala et al. [7] experimented with an AR-based museum
guide, using a portable computer, (without a HWD) and
found out that "AR assisted interfaces can indeed
successfully facilitate visitors intuitively switch their focus
and attention from the physical to the digital space and vice
versa, even in the complex context of the museum space."
Schiele et al. [14] describes a wearable VR device, which
includes image recognition capability. By looking at real
objects, the users received a VR presentation of animations
and sound. Most of the users gave a positive feedback to the
system. Mase et al. [12] presented the Meta Museum
concept and the VisTa system which uses a VR HMD
system that visualizes the evolution of an ancient village in
Japan. The authors noted that they plan also to produce a
see-through (AR) system, but no further details were
provided. An application of a HWD as a museum guide was
developed and demonstrated by Sparacino et al. [15] at the
museum wearable project, where smart glasses were part of
a mobile, personalized and context aware museum visitors
guide system. The system was made by a lightweight CPU
hosted inside a small shoulder pack and a small, lightweight
HWD which was called then private-eye display. The
display was a commercial monocular, VGA-resolution,
color, clip-on screen attached to a pair of sturdy
headphones. The system provided personalized information
by using position and time information for inferring users'
interests and assigning the user to one of three different
types (that determines the information provided to the
visitor). The exhibit objects were augmented with video,
images and text, displayed around the object of the interest.
Vlahakis et al. [17] presented three implementations of a
visitor guide for an archeological site, two of them were
handheld devices and one was a Laptop with an HMD and
earphone devices that had also an AR display. The system
included descriptions, navigation information, and
personalization of a visitor’s tour in the archeological site.
Visitors of the Olympia site in Greece tested the guide.
They praised the guide for realism, but indicated that during
walking they felt uncomfortable to wear it. Recently, Chang
et al. [6], described a mobile guide system (not HMD
based) that integrates art appreciation instruction with AR
that was designed as an auxiliary tool for painting
appreciation. The learning performance of three groups of
visiting participants was explored: AR-guided, audioguided, and nonguided. The results showed that compared
to the audio- and nonguided participants, the AR guide
effectively enhanced visitors’ learning effectiveness,
promoted their flow experience, and extended the amount

On a different aspect, Alce et al. [2] explored the
applicability of the Wizard of Oz method for eliciting users'
feedback about the use of simulated smart glasses with AR
capability in the scenario of a city tour and found it to be a
useful tool for that purpose. However, they focused mainly
on the classical usability aspects of their simulated system.
As we can see, most HWD studies in CH focused on
exploring and demonstrating the potential of AR and
HWDs to enrich and enhance the museum visit experience.
However, only few of them went beyond demonstration and
collection of users' feedback to the specific application or
tried to study and address users' needs. In this study,
somewhat similar to [2, 3] we focus on users and
understanding their requirements from smart-glasses based
museum visitors' guide.
USER REQUIREMENTS FOR GLASSES-BASED GUIDE

Given our focus on understanding visitors' needs first, a
qualitative study was carried out to understand the
requirements of potential users for a smart-glasses museum
guide. The study involved 17 participants (ages 19-57), who
have visited a museum at least once. Data was collected by
semi-structured interviews, where for each question the
participant was asked to explain the reason for the answer.
Before the interviews, participants wore and experimented
with a Vuzix M100 smart glasses device to understand the
potential for such a device at the museum. Users'
requirements were elicited from the transcripts of the
interviews. During the interviews, 94% (16 out of 17) of the
participants answered that they think that a HWD museum
guide will be useful and they will be glad to use it.
During the interview the participants indicated requirements
with features that they would prefer to have in the guide
and features that they would prefer not to have in the guide.
After a qualitative analysis of the interview results, we
assembled together several topics for requirements. These
topics are discussed next (Given the fact that users provided
several requirements in different categories, the numbers do
not add up to 17).
System proactiveness

An important feature of a HWD mobile guide is its ability
to provide continuous information related to its
surrounding. However, in a context-aware system, the
question is whether the system should keep the user in
control, only responding to user requests, or should the
system take initiative and propose information and services.
Most participants (11 out of 17) preferred to keep the user
in control, where the user decides when to receive
information. Five participants preferred a proactive system
in which the system anticipates what the user is doing and
provides information accordingly. Three of them asked for

328

IUI 2016 • Wearable and Mobile IUI 2

March 7–10, 2016, Sonoma, CA, USA

a location (gaze) aware system. Three participants asked to
be able to set up the mode of operation (proactive/passive).
This preference for control over proactiveness is in sync
with user preferences with a handheld mobile guide [11].

(6), and one participant mentioned that data should not be
saved after the visit.
Additional features

Users seem to be aware of classical functions and
limitations of mobile devices at the museum. They asked
for indoor navigation support (8), recommendations (6),
group interaction (1), addressing different audiences, e.g.
children (1) translation capabilities (1) and presenting
battery status (1). In addition, some users expressed the
need for multilingual guide (2) and the need for operating
instructions in the users' language (1).

Interaction with the device

There are many options for how to interact with
information when using a HWD. Users' interaction
preferences for a HWD mobile guide varied greatly. There
were 12 requests to control the glasses with an
accompanied mobile device, 8 requests for using physical
touch on the side of the glasses (through buttons or slide
gestures), 5 requests for voice commands and 6 requests for
mid-air hand gestures. It is interesting to note that 8
participants objected to voice commands, mostly because of
the quiet environment of the museum, and the request for
privacy.

User preference about content presentation

Two users found the ability to control the size of the virtual
image using the glasses an important option (2). Other
requests were that text size should be readable (3), audio
volume should be adjustable (1), the user should be able to
select the type of media presented (2), fast forward it (2),
stop it (2), and that the guide should proactively stop
presentation when the user moves away (3).

Device characteristics

A large group of requirements related to the device's
characteristics. The users wanted a light weight device (17),
and the ability to adjust/remove the display (11). Some
users preferred a display for both eyes located at the center
of the glasses (7) while others preferred a one eye, top
display similar to Google glass or the Vusix M100 (6). It is
interesting to note that even aesthetics of the device was
commented as important by one user.

Training

One participant explicitly asked that “At the beginning of
the visit the user should receive training”. According to the
participant, no matter which type of interaction this device
uses, thorough training should take place.
PROTOTYPE DEVELOPMENT

Information delivery

We developed the first prototype of a HWD imagerecognition guide. It enables the user to easily receive
information about exhibits of interest. For this prototype,
four artworks at the Hecht museum1 were used for initial
experimentation.

When asked about what type of information they would like
to receive, visitors expressed a wide variety of preferences
towards different types of media. This included text (6),
Audio (14), video (11), and images (11). This demonstrates
the need for a variety of media options. Having information
registered to the real-world position of the museum objects
(i.e., see-through AR), was also important (13). It is
interesting to note that a large number of users objected to
text (10) as they said it is not easy to read with the glasses.
Some objected to video (4) as it distracts the visitor from
the museum and some (4) objected to audio.

Architecture and system

The system includes two parts (see Figure 1): a client and a
server. The client is an Android application, which is
installed on a Vuzix M100 smart glasses. The server
includes server implementation and an image recognition
function. The image recognition is implemented using
Speeded-Up Robust Features (SURF) algorithm [4]. C++
Open CV libraries were used for development. In addition
we added a decision rule for images similarity, based on the
similarity found between the image taken by the user and a
set of exhibits images taken from different angles.

Personalization and privacy

Most users want to be able to choose from multiple content
items (13), yet they still expect personalization (10), and
acknowledge that the system should monitor them for that
(12). Some also agree that the system would collect
information about them from external sources (4). Others
asked to be in control of data collection (2). The users
expected the system to implicitly recognize their interest
(like when standing a long time in front of an exhibit) and
accordingly extend its explanations (3), or provide users
with the ability to explicitly do that (6). However, some
users objected to the need to choose content (4), and some
objected to any need for filling up any form for
personalization (6). There was some objection to
monitoring (4) and data collection from external sources

For receiving information about a specific exhibit, the user
should press a button on the smart glasses. At this point, the
Android application takes a picture from the user’s
viewpoint and transfers it to the server that performs image
recognition. Once the object of interest is identified, the
server sends appropriate complementary information to the
Android application for presentation (Figure 1 illustrates
the process).
1

329

http://mushecht.haifa.ac.il/

IUI 2016 • Wearable and Mobile IUI 2

March 7–10, 2016, Sonoma, CA, USA

of developing a research prototype highly demanding (as it
is with more traditional mobile guides). It is worth noting
that in general, research prototypes intended to be evaluated
in realistic setting, need to be of high quality and sometimes
become systems used by visitors on a daily basis, which is a
major benefit, as can be seen in [9,10,11].
It is important to note that in this study, we refer to
requirements that are relevant nowadays. Today people do
not use smart-glasses as they use smart-phones. This fact
can influence the proposed requirements, as in the future,
some of the results may change in accordance with the
progress of the technology.
This work describes the first steps of our research. For
better understanding of the usefulness of the new
technology, we will compare a handheld museum guide
with a HWD guide. The different modalities of presenting
and interacting with information can influence the ease of
use and general experience of the visitor. Potential users
might be accustomed to handheld devices, and there might
be issues with acceptability of a new technology. On the
other hand, the HWD affords handless interaction and
promises a less mediated, and possibly more engaging
experience.

Figure 1: System architecture
Lessons learned

Lessons learned from the HWD museum guide prototype
implementation include:
1. The reference images should be with minimum
background and frames of the pictures. The backgrounds
and frames of the pictures can be similar for different
exhibits. This similarity inserts noise to the image
recognition process.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

2. For better image recognition, it is important to use
reference images with similar quality to the pictures that
the user takes in real time. It is important to note that
image processing utilities, can change the image quality.

We presented potential user requirements for a HWD
museum-guide. The requirements seem to be challenging.
As they are diverse and sometime contradicting. Hence,
addressing them all requires developing a very flexible and
configurable system. Following the requirements
definitions, an initial research prototype was developed.
There are works, which compare different algorithms,
including SURF, for recognition of museum objects [5]. In
the next step, we are going to extend the prototype
implementation to object recognition for supplying users’
requirements. Then, the prototype will be evaluated and
improved in an iterative manner, following a user centered
design process until a satisfactory system will be available.
The next step will be comparing the use of HWD with a
more conventional museum visitor's guide at a real
museum. Two versions of a museum visitors guide system
will be used. One is an existing handheld, personalized,
context aware museum visitors' guide system that has been
developed and deployed in the museum, while the second
will be the same system, adapted to enable users' interaction
through the mobile glasses. In the user studies, with regular
museum visitors, the following aspects will be evaluated:
usability, the overall visit experience and the impact of the
systems on group interaction when the visitor comes with a
group of friends – a common scenario. Data will be
collected in two complementary ways: by system logs that
will enable to analyze visitors' movements through the
museum, time spent at POIs and information viewed, and
by questionnaires and interviews.

3. Taking pictures with a particular device and a particular
application causes all pictures to be of the same image
dimensions. For exhibits with nonstandard dimensions,
this fact makes it difficult to capture this exhibit in order
to store it in the database.
4. Taking pictures with extreme angles can worsen the
results of the image recognition.
DISCUSSION

Considering the requirements, it is clear that users are well
aware of the potential of mobile technologies and use their
current experience when considering a smart glasses based
museum visitors guide. They are looking for a product with
rich functionality – that will provide both information and
navigational support (which are two main types of support
needed by visitors to CH sites). Most users prefer to remain
in control, deciding when and where information should be
presented, although proactiveness is preferred by a
minority. In addition, users want personalization and are
aware that it requires monitoring their behavior, and to
some extent, giving up their privacy. Moreover, usability in
general seems highly important and with this respect, the
need to cater to a wider variety of users, with different
preferences with respect to types of media and ways of
interaction is brought up. It is clear that users will be
looking for a high quality product, as they are used
nowadays to high quality smartphones, which make the task

330

IUI 2016 • Wearable and Mobile IUI 2

March 7–10, 2016, Sonoma, CA, USA

REFERENCES

9. Kuflik, T., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., Gorfinkel, A.,
Jbara, S., Kats, S. & Kashtan, N. (2011). A visitor's
guide in an active museum: Presentations,
communications, and reflection. Journal on Computing
and Cultural Heritage (JOCCH), 3(3), 11.
10. Lanir J., Kuflik T. ,Dim E. ,Wecker A. J. , Stock O.
(2013). The Influence of a Location-Aware Mobile
Guide on Museum Visitors’ Behavior. Interacting with
Computers, vol. 25, no. 6, p. 443–460.
11. Lanir J., Kuflik T., Wecker A. J., Stock O., Zancanaro
M. (2011). Examining proactiveness and choice in a
location-aware mobile museum guide,. Interacting with
Computers, vol. 23, no. 5, p. 513–524.
12. Mase K., Kadobayashi R., Nakatsu R. (1996). MetaMuseum: A Supportive Augmented-Reality
Environment for Knowledge Sharing," in In ATR
Workshop on Social Agents: Humans and Machines,
Kyoto, Japan.
13. Mirza K. and Sarayeddine K. (2012). Key challenges to
affordable see through wearable displays: The missing
link for mobile AR mass deployment. Optivent S.A,
Rennes, France.
14. Schiele B., Jebara T. and Oliver N. (2001). SensoryAugmented Computing: Wearing the Museum’s Guide.
IEEE Micro, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 44 - 52.
15. Sparacino F. (2002). The Museum Wearable: real-time
sensor-driven understanding of visitors’ interests for
personalized visually-augmented museum experiences.
in Museums and the Web , Boston.
16. Styliani, S., Fotis, L., Kostas, K., & Petros, P. (2009).
Virtual museums, a survey and some issues for
consideration. Journal of cultural Heritage, 10(4), 520528.
17. Vlahakis V., Ioannidis N., Karigiannis J., Tsotros M.,
Gounaris M., Stricker D., Gleue T., Daehne P. and
Almeida, L. (2002). Archeoguide: An Augmented
Reality Guide for Archaeological Sites. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 52-60.

1. Ardissono, L., Kuflik, T., & Petrelli, D. (2012).
Personalization in cultural heritage: the road travelled
and the one ahead. User modeling and user-adapted
interaction, 22(1-2), 73-99.
2. Alce G., Wallergård M. and Hermodsson K. (2015)
WozARd: A Wizard of Oz Method for Wearable
Augmented. Advances in Human-Computer Interaction,
vol. 2015, p. 10.
3. Banowosari L. Y., Rahmah M., Rizky G. A. and Fuady
M. A. R. (2013). Design Concept of Augmented Reality
Application with Glasses for Indonesia Wayang
Museum. International Journal of Advances in
Engineering & Technology, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 1564-1570.
4. Bay H., Ess A., Tuytelaars T. and Gool L.V. (2008).
Speeded-Up Robust Features (SURF), Computer Vision
and Image Understanding, vol. 110, no. 3, pp. 346–359.
5. Bay H., Fasel B. and Gool L. V. (2006). Interactive
museum guide: Fast and robust recognition of museum
objects. Proceedings of the first international workshop
on mobile vision.
6. Chang, K. E., Chang, C. T., Hou, H. T., Sung, Y. T.,
Chao, H. L., & Lee, C. M. (2014). Development and
behavioral pattern analysis of a mobile guide system
with augmented reality for painting appreciation
instruction in an art museum. Computers & Education,
71, 185-197.
7. Damala A., Cubaud P., Bationo A., Houlier P., Marchal
I. (2008). Bridging the gap between the digital and the
physical: design and evaluation of a mobile augmented
reality guide for the museum visit. in DIMEA '08
Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on
Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts,
New York.
8. Kraemer, H., & Kanter, N. (2014). Use and re-use of
data how Collection Management Systems, Transmedia
and Augmented Reality impact the future of museum. In
Virtual Systems & Multimedia (VSMM), 2014
International Conference on (pp. 214-216). IEEE.

331
View publication stats

