Aalborg Universitet

Understanding and modelling built environments for mobile guide interface design
Paay, Jeni; Kjeldskov, Jesper
Published in:
Behavior and Information Technology
DOI (link to publication from Publisher):
10.1080/01449290512331319012

Publication date:
2005
Document Version
Accepted author manuscript, peer reviewed version
Link to publication from Aalborg University

Citation for published version (APA):
Paay, J., & Kjeldskov, J. (2005). Understanding and modelling built environments for mobile guide interface
design. Behavior and Information Technology, 24(1), 21-35. https://doi.org/10.1080/01449290512331319012

General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
? Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
? You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
? You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ?
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: December 04, 2021

Behaviour & Information Technology, Vol. 24, No. 1, January – February 2005, 21 – 35

Understanding and modelling built environments for mobile guide
interface design
J. PAAY{ and J. KJELDSKOV{*
{Department of Information Systems and Faculty of Architecture, Building and Planning, The University
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia
{Human-Computer Interaction Group, Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, DK-9220
Aalborg East, Denmark
The research presented in this paper aims to inform interface design for mobile guides by
understanding and modelling the built environments in which the guide will be used. This
is important because research into the use of mobile guides has shown that people have a
strong ability to make sense of the physical space in which they are situated and make use
of this when using mobile guides. Based on a ﬁeld study and architectural analysis of the
recently built Federation Square in Melbourne, Australia, we present a descriptive
framework, MIRANDA, which provides a summarized abstraction of the fundamental
architectural and informational features of a built environment. The use of this
descriptive framework in HCI design for mobile guides is exempliﬁed through the design
of a mobile guide system for Federation Square that was informed by the identiﬁed
architectural characteristics. On the basis of the ﬁeld study and example design, we argue
that mobile guides interface design can beneﬁt from making use of ‘knowledge-in-theworld’ by streamlining and indexing information and functionality to physical
information cues implicit in the built environment surrounding the user.

1. Introduction
Mobile guides are increasingly becoming a part of the way
in which we operate in the physical world, and studies
suggest that one of the major applications of future mobile
information technology will be to digitally enhance user
activities by giving access to contextually adopted information through such guides. Hence, the design of mobile
guides has received considerable attention over the last
decade within the ﬁeld of human – computer interaction
(HCI) (see Abowd et al. 1996, Cheverst et al. 2000, Cheverst
et al. 2002, Pospischil et al. 2002). The HCI research
literature indicates a broad spectrum of diﬀerent application
areas for mobile guides. Mobile city guides provide the user
with maps and other relevant information such as the
location of restaurants, public oﬃces, tourist sites etc.
adapted to the user’s location (Cheverst et al. 2000, Cheverst

et al. 2002, Pospischil et al. 2002, Iacucci et al. 2003,
Schmidt-Belz and Poslad 2003, Laakso et al. 2003). Mobile
guides for speciﬁc tourist-sites provide users with the
opportunity to follow guided tours or access additional
information about the site being visited (Hermann and
Heidmann 2002, Bornträger and Cheverst 2003, Bornträger
et al. 2003) and mobile museum guides provide additional
information about the speciﬁc items on display (Aoki and
Woodruﬀ 2000, Opperman and Specht 2000, Rocchi et al.
2003). Other mobile guide systems support the user’s social
or personal life, such as mobile personal guides and event
planners keeping track of friends and upcoming social
events (Fithian et al. 2003, Kolari and Virtanen 2003,
Paulos and Goodman 2004) or mobile shopping assistants
keeping track of shopping lists and informing the users
about special oﬀers within their vicinity (Randell and
Muller 2000, Bohnenberger et al. 2002). Assisting people

*Corresponding author. Email: jesper@cs.aau.dk
Behaviour & Information Technology
ISSN 0144-929X print/ISSN 1362-3001 online # 2005 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/01449290512331319012

22

J. Paay and J. Kjeldskov

commuting and travelling, mobile navigation guides provide route planning information and directions for wayﬁnding (Holland and Morse 2001, Chincholle et al. 2002,
Kulju and Kaasinen 2002) and mobile travel planners keep
track of users’ itineraries, upcoming meetings etc. (Ricci et
al. 2002, Kjeldskov et al. 2003).
Many of these mobile guide systems involve the user
being situated in the built environment of a public space.
Yet only a few references have investigated the challenges
imposed and opportunities oﬀered by the use of mobile
guide systems in the context of buildings and other
architectural structures in urban spaces. Exceptions include
Vainio et al. (2002) who study navigation and way ﬁnding
supported by a 3D model-based mobile city guide with
clear architectural features such as landmarks, Kulju and
Kaasinen (2002) who compare the use of photographs and
semi-realistic 3D models augmented with textual information on mobile guides for supporting the user’s experience
of a physical space, and Laakso et al. (2003) who study the
use of realistic 3D maps with topological as well as
architectural features as a planning and navigational aid
for leisure boat tourists at sea and in the cities they visit.
These studies show that people often have a strong ability
to make sense of the physical space in which they are
situated and typically make extensive use of this when using
mobile guides in a built environment. Consequently, it is
argued that the use of mobile guides for navigation, way
ﬁnding, etc. in environments with distinct architectural or
other physical features (such as landmarks, noticeable
physical structures or special topology) can beneﬁt from
taking these features into account by, for example, simply
including visual representations of them using street
perspective or bird’s-eye views (Vainio et al. 2002, Laakso
et al. 2003, Nakanishi et al. 2004). However, in order to
exploit the user’s ability to make sense of architectural
features in their physical surroundings in HCI design for
mobile guides, we need to better understand the role of the
user’s physical environment in deﬁning their context and
the contribution of existing information embedded into
that environment to people’s experience of it (Agre 2001,
Bradley and Dunlop 2002, Tamminen et al. 2003). Also, we
need to learn how to make a clear connection between the
user’s physical surroundings and the information presented
on their mobile guide (Dix et al. 2000, Persson et al. 2002).
So far, systematic methods for gathering, analyzing and
understanding the properties of a built environment that
help deﬁne the user’s physical context, and appropriate
analytical abstractions suitable for informing interaction
design on the basis of this, have not yet been developed.
1.1

Indexicality: relating interfaces to their context

An interesting approach to making a clearer relation
between mobile device interfaces and the user’s context is

to apply the idea of indexicality. Indexicality is a concept
drawn from semiotics describing the relation between
information representations and the context in which an
interpreter (user) perceives them. Semiotics operates with
three types of representations: symbolic (conventional),
iconic (similarity) and indexical (material/causal). Symbols
and icons are ways of representing information independent of context like, for example, text and graphical
illustrations. Indexes, on the other hand, are ways of
representing information with a strong relation to, for
example, their spatial and/or temporal context exploiting
information present in the interpreter’s surroundings. Thus,
indexical representations are highly context-speciﬁc and
only make sense in particular situations; at a speciﬁc time,
in a speciﬁc location, in relation to a speciﬁc activity, to
speciﬁc people, etc. As an example, signposts and information boards are typically highly indexical in the sense that
their meaning is tied to a speciﬁc location. By locating
information in time and space, symbolic and iconic
representations can be converted into temporal and spatial
indexical representations (Andersen 2001). As shown by
Kjeldskov (2002), increasing the level of indexicality
typically results in a signiﬁcant reduction of required
symbolic and iconic representations.
The concept of indexicality has previously been applied
to the design of mobile guide interfaces (Kjeldskov 2002,
Graham and Kjeldskov 2003, Kjeldskov et al. 2003) in
order to streamline the information and functionality
delivered to the user. The idea of applying indexicality to
interface design for mobile guides is that if information and
functionality on a mobile guide can be indexed to the user’s
context, then information already provided by the context
becomes implicit and does not need to be displayed by the
system. Hence, the user’s environment becomes a vital part
of the interface. This way of making use of ‘knowledge-inthe-world’ (Norman 1990) allows the limited screen real
estate of mobile guides to be optimized to contain only the
most vital content and the required user interaction with
the mobile guide to be reduced. As a simpliﬁed example of
this, an indexical mobile guide for patrons entering a
cinema complex could be made temporally and spatially
indexical by taking into account the time and location of
the user, providing only information about the upcoming
movies playing within a limited frame of time (temporal
indexicality) in that speciﬁc cinema (spatial indexicality)
(Kjeldskov 2002).
In the studies mentioned above, the mobile guide
interface designs only explored temporal and spatial
indexicality. However, the idea of indexical interfaces could
also be broadened to exploit other aspects of the user’s
context. In addition to time and location, for example,
factors such as existing information in our surroundings,
the features of the built environment itself and the use of
that environment by other people also play an important

Built environments for mobile guide interface design

role in the context surrounding a mobile user (Paay 2003),
and may also be indexed to in a mobile guide.
Relying heavily on the user’s knowledge about, for
instance, when, where and why they are situated, successful
design of indexical interfaces for mobile guides require that
HCI designers have a strong understanding of the aspects
of the user’s context that they are indexing to. Hence, in
order to include indexes to the built environment in the
design of a mobile guide, the features of the built
environment contributing to the user-experience of the
physical space in which it will be used, needs to be analyzed
and modelled in a way that extracts the essence of the place
and provides an overview. Information embedded into the
built environment and carrying parts of its meaning
through its architectural features needs to be identiﬁed
and proposals for how this can be applied to mobile guide
design needs to be developed and evaluated.
This paper contributes to this discussion by presenting 1)
a possible approach to enquiring into the features of a built
environment informed by theories and methods derived
from architecture, 2) a method for creating a descriptive
abstraction on the basis of the ﬁeld data, and 3) an example
of how this abstraction can be used to inform the design of
a mobile guide prototype. In section 2, we present and
discuss the architectural theories and methods used in the
study. In section 3, we report from a ﬁeld study into the
architectural and informational properties of a speciﬁc built
environment, Federation Square in Melbourne, Australia.
The idea and early results from this study are described by
Paay (2003). The outcome of the ﬁeld study is presented in
the form of a descriptive framework for modelling and
understanding the built environment called MIRANDA,
which captures positive and negative architectural and
informational properties of a physical space. In section 4,
the use of this descriptive framework in HCI design for
mobile guides is exempliﬁed through the design of a mobile
guide system for Federation Square, in which the interface
is indexed to the built environment by exploiting information already implicitly present in the user’s physical
surroundings. Finally, section 5 concludes our work and
outlines our present and future directions of research.
2. Analyzing the built environment
Architectural design has a history of incorporation of social
theories and user needs into design methods. Of special
interest, urban planner, Kevin Lynch (1960) and architect,
Christopher Alexander (Alexander et al. 1977) both
modelled built environments, speciﬁcally cities, with regard
to the people that inhabit those places, hence implicitly
including the users in their analysis of physical space.
Lynch (1960) developed a method for visual analysis of
city precincts through descriptions of key aspects of the
space held by people as they navigate and orient themselves

23

within city precincts. This was done by diagramming the
interplay of visible elements in the environment that
contribute to a person’s environmental image of a place.
His purpose was to develop ideas and methods, rather than
to prove facts in a ﬁnal and determinate way. The method
proved successful at assisting in the analysis of types of
elements of a city, how they are put together, and what
makes for strong identity. It also proved to be a useful
technique for predicting the probable public image of that
city. Lynch documented this technique for describing and
understanding key aspects of the environmental image of
space held by people as they navigate and orient themselves
within city precincts and noted that it would be interesting
to apply this method to an environment of a diﬀerent scale.
To understand the role of environmental images of cities in
the lives of those who inhabit them, Lynch carried out two
basic analyses. Firstly, interviews were conducted with
people who either lived or worked in that area. The city
dwellers image of the city was elicited from them using
interview techniques which included asking participants to
describe features of the city from memory, asking them to
draw sketches of the city, and having them make imaginary
trips to destinations within the city precinct. Secondly, a
ﬁeld reconnaissance was done by an architecturally trained
observer, who mapped the presence of various elements of
the physical environment, using categories that had proven
signiﬁcant in analysis of earlier pilot interviews: districts,
landmarks, nodes, edges and paths. The observer made
subjective judgments based on the immediate appearance of
these elements in the ﬁeld and about their visible contribution to the image of the city, which resulted in maps
representing the visual form of a city in respect to these ﬁve
elements. These maps were then compared to those maps
derived from consensus information collected in the verbal
interviews and the sketch maps made by the inhabitants to
draw conclusions about ‘imageability’ of built environments.
Alexander et al. (1977) empirically investigated the
interplay between architectural space and its inhabitants
and identiﬁed architectural design problems in context and
their impact on inhabitants of that environment. Drawn
from observations of historical solutions to common design
problems, he created a method of analyzing aspects of the
built environment and generated a ‘checklist’ of plausible
solutions for design. This checklist was constituted by a
collection of 253 hierarchically ordered patterns making up
a ‘Pattern Language’ (Alexander et al. 1977) that begins
with patterns deﬁning towns and communities, through the
design of individual buildings, down to the detailed design
of building elements. The pattern language provides a
framework for solutions to these common design problems.
Each pattern describes the ﬁeld of physical and social
relationships required to solve a design problem in its
stated context. These patterns in themselves are a form of

24

J. Paay and J. Kjeldskov

composite pictures including: photographs, sketches, descriptive explanations detailing the context for the pattern,
its relationship to parent patterns, a description of the
problem, the empirical background of the pattern, evidence
for its validity, and the design solution.
The methods of Lynch (1960) and Alexander et al. (1977)
have not only proven their value within architecture, but
have also demonstrated usefulness in HCI research in
analyzing the interplay between architectural, informational and social space with the purpose of designing
computerized information systems.
The work of Lynch (1960) is often referenced in relation
to the design of computer systems supporting orientation
and navigation in complex virtual information spaces,
virtual environments and in the real world, and is claimed
to be one of the most inﬂuential and useful pieces of
research on spatial orientation and navigation for interaction designers (Sparacino et al. 2000). Information City
(Dieberger and Frank 1998) is an ontology of spaces and
connections based on Lynch’s ﬁve major elements developed to support navigation in large information spaces
where a spatial metaphor supports a user’s sense of
orientation by the use of recognizable landmarks. Similarly,
Sparacino et al. (2000) present a 3D web browser using an
urban-like information landscape following the guidelines
proposed by Lynch (1960) to fetch and represent information from the web. Supporting navigation in virtual reality,
Ingram and Benford (1996) apply urban planning principles to the design of virtual environments using Lynch’s
work to improve the navigation of a virtual environment
including districts, landmarks, paths, nodes and edges.
Vinson (1999) proposes a series of guidelines for how
designers can create and place landmarks in virtual
environments for supporting navigation and orientation.
Informing the design of a mobile guide system, Kulju and
Kaasinen (2002) draw on the work of Lynch (1960) to
include landmarks in a 3D city model on a mobile device
and augment them with additional textual information to
optimize spatial orientation.
The work of Alexander (Alexander et al. 1977) has been
successfully applied within various areas of computing;
from object-oriented software design (Gamma 1996) to
human – computer interaction (Tidwell 1999, Borchers
2001). Inspired by, among others, Alexander et al. (1977),
Harrison and Dourish (1996) deﬁne a distinction between
space and place, and illustrate the inﬂuence of peoples sense
of place on their interactive behavior. Designing information technologies for the domestic environment, Crabtree
and Hemmings (2001) use an adapted pattern framework to
inform requirements analysis and describe day-to-day use
of technologies within that environment. Informing novel
design of pervasive and mobile device services, Paulos and
Goodman (2004) enquire into the application of new
technologies by city inhabitants, and draw an analogy

between Alexander’s patterns and the movement and
activities of people in urban settings. In line with this
research, McCullough (2001) points out that as interest in
information technologies for physical contexts increases,
what we already know from the work of people such as
Alexander about the built environment and how people
operate in it, can inform our understanding of peoples’
situated interactions, and guide the design of technologies
that consider the user’s physical context.
3. Field study: Federation Square
Inspired by Lynch (1960) and Alexander et al. (1977), we
conducted a ﬁeld study of the architecturally designed built
environment at Federation Square, Melbourne, Australia.
Federation Square (ﬁgure 1) is a new civic structure,
opened to the public in October 2002, to provide the people
of Melbourne with a ‘unifying square, a landmark, a civic
focus’ (oﬃcial brochure), by bringing together a creative
mix of attractions and public spaces. The design intention
for the space was to incorporate digital technologies into
the building fabric creating a meeting of virtual information space and physical building space for people to
experience. We chose Federation Square for this study
because it is a multi-modal public space with a mixture of
distinct architectural features and embedded digital elements that provide a variety of activities to visitors.
The aim of the ﬁeld study was to inquire into how
informational and architectural elements of the built
environment contribute to the visitor’s experience of a
public place, and how this could subsequently be modelled.
Thus, we wanted to identify important properties of the
built environment as an inhabited public space and create
an analytical abstraction, which could inform the design of
a mobile guide supporting visitors to this place. The result
of the ﬁeld study is a descriptive framework called
MIRANDA (Multilayer Information Related to Architecture aNalysis Data Abstraction), representing the human
experience of the informational (analogue and digital
signage) and architectural properties of a physical space.
The result of the subsequent prototype design is a proof of
concept for a mobile guide which takes these properties
into consideration.
The study consisted of the following sequential activities:
.
.
.
.
.

Field inspection of Federation Square.
Data coding (based on Lynch (1960) and Alexander et
al. (1977)).
Data analysis.
Data synthesizing: developing MIRANDA.
Development of mobile guide prototype design.

The ﬁeld inspection took approximately three hours, data
coding took eight hours, and data analysis took approxi-

Built environments for mobile guide interface design

25

Figure 1. Federation Square.

mately three days. Synthesizing the data took eight hours
and developing the preliminary prototype design took
approximately two days. Although these estimates can
serve as guidelines for similar analysis by other mobile guide
designers, the exact time spent on these activities would
depend on the size of the physical site being analyzed.
The details of these activities are described below.
3.1

Inspecting Federation Square

An initial visit was made to Federation Square by the ﬁrst
author, and resulted in the development of a scenario of the
experience of a ﬁrst-time visitor to the square. Observational expert audits were then made of Federation Square
for both architectural and information space, in two
separate ﬁeld visits. These expert audits were inspired by
the method outlined by Lynch (1960) in his visual analysis
of city precincts for the purpose of identifying types of
elements of a city. In his method, an architecturally trained
observer maps the presence of various elements of the
physical environment. In this adapted method, the trained
observer records, through photographs and ﬁeld notes, the
elements of the physical environment for later classiﬁcation

using signiﬁcant categories. These visits, each taking about
three hours to complete, resulted in a collection of 250
digital photographs of physical elements of the built
environment. The location of each photograph was
recorded on a map of Federation Square, and corresponding observations of the relationship between the elements
being photographed and the environment (including
interaction with people inhabiting the space) were recorded
in the form of ﬁeld notes.
3.2

Coding the data

The photographs were stored electronically in a format
where they could be directly associated with their corresponding observational ﬁeld notes and sketches, and could
be annotated further during the process of coding and
analysis. For the information elements, each sign and
media screen was sketched showing its relationship to
building fabric, viewing direction and distance, and then
annotated with general ﬁeld notes explaining the sketches
and detailing auditor observations of human activity in
relationship to the signage. For the architectural elements,
ﬁeld notes recorded observations made by the trained

26

J. Paay and J. Kjeldskov

auditor including general descriptions of elements and
human responses to physical spaces within the architecturally designed environment. The coding of this data was
necessarily a two-phase process, given that the original
source data was a mixture of images and descriptive text.
The ﬁrst pass through the data used the encoding schemas
to convert classiﬁed elements of the images into corresponding text. The second pass combined the classiﬁcationgenerated image descriptions with existing observational
ﬁeld data and highlighted those aspects of the resulting
prose that contributed to the encoded abstraction of that
data.
In coding the information elements, the graphic communication theories and concepts of Bowman (1968), Tufte
(1990) and Bertin (2003) were used to derive the following
set of classiﬁcations for the information elements: type,
direction, distance, visibility, readability, and location.
These categories were used as an encoding schema, to
group and order descriptions of sketches and ﬁeld notes in
the electronic ﬁle. The ordered descriptions were then read
through in their entirety several times, and repeating
phrases and key concepts associated with the encoding
schema were highlighted in the descriptions associated with
the images. Bowman (1968), Bertin (1983) and Tufte (1990)
were used to develop the categories for the analysis of
information space because their graphic communication
theories are based on human interpretation and human
understanding of graphic elements in signage, and therefore
necessarily incorporate human experience of information
into the analysis.
The architectural elements were classiﬁed initially using
Lynch’s (1960) categories of: district, landmark, node,
path, and edge, as an encoding schema. Using Lynch’s
detailed descriptions of what constitutes each of these
categories, the key element of each image was classiﬁed in
respect to the schema, by the architecturally trained auditor
using a visual inspection technique. The photographs were
annotated with a legend indicating their association with
one or many of the ﬁve categories. An additional
classiﬁcation of this data was then conducted on the
architectural elements using the 253 patterns of Alexander’s
pattern language as an encoding schema. Sketches and
notes showing the applicability of each pattern were
appended to the existing ﬁeld notes. Each image was
associated with one or many Alexandrian patterns, and the
photograph annotated with the pattern number and pattern
title of each associated pattern. The text descriptions
associated with each architectural photograph were then
read through several times to identify key concepts and
repeating phrases in the loosely structured data that related
to the encoding schema. These key themes were highlighted
in the text data.
Lynch (1960) and Alexander et al. (1977) were used to
derive the encoding schemas for this analysis because the

categories that they provide were the outcomes of empirical
studies of the interplay between architectural space and
people, and this study aims to understand and model the
human experience of a place.
3.3

Analyzing the data

Using a form of content analysis adopted from rapid
ethnographic method (Millen 2000), the highlighted concepts and themes were extracted from the descriptive prose,
and analysed to see if some kind of ‘vocabulary’ of the
space would emerge.
The architectural data was analysed ﬁrst. The Lynchian
categories derived from the image data were directly
mapped and overlaid onto an existing two-dimensional
map of Federation Square to produce a colour-coded
abstraction indicating the location of the environmental
categories. From this diagram it was clear that four key
districts and four key landmarks could be identiﬁed in the
complex. District 1 is a transit zone, a connector to the city,
and has a focus on Landmark 1, the information centre.
District 2 is the main plaza, an earthy uneven textured
sloping open space with outdoors activities, which focuses
on Landmark 2, the stage and large media screen. District 3
is the atrium precinct, sheltered, noisy, and constructed of
machine-made materials. Its focus is Landmark 3, the
entrance, a large opening to this area. District 4 is the river
precinct, which has the feeling of being at the back; ﬂat,
damp and lower than the rest of the spaces, Landmark 4,
the river, is the focus of this district (see ﬁgure 2).
The next stage was to use aﬃnity diagramming adapted
from the contextual design methodology (Beyer and
Holtzblatt 1998) to group and reﬁne the repeating phrases
and key concepts that were identiﬁed in the data through
the encoding process. Each phrase and word was written on
a post-it note, and these notes were stuck on a large white
board. After several iterations of grouping, regrouping,
forming sets of words and reﬁning words to a concise set of
representative terms, the following themes emerged: words
that described the space in terms of how it felt to people
(aﬀect), words that gave rich descriptions of architectural
features, words that described the location of elements in
relation to each other, and words that described human
activity in the space. The emerging words were, by virtue of
the encoding schema, inﬂuenced by the categories of Lynch
(1960) and Alexander et al. (1977).
The same process of aﬃnity diagramming was used with
the informational data, and the following themes emerged:
words that related to the readability of signs, words that
related to the visibility of signs, words that related to the
physical location of the sign, words that described how
people were using the signs, and words that described the
quality and usefulness of information given (including the
understandability and eﬀectiveness of the information).

Built environments for mobile guide interface design

27

Figure 2. Federation Square: district and landmarks.

The emerging words were, by virtue of the encoding
schema, inﬂuenced by the classiﬁcations and descriptions of
graphic communication used by Bowman (1968), Bertin
(1983) and Tufte (1990).
3.4

Synthesizing the data: MIRANDA

The process of grouping, sorting, dissecting and reﬁning
word sets using the aﬃnity diagramming method had
resulted in an emergent ‘vocabulary’, for both the
architectural and the informational data, which described
the physical environment using a concise set of words and
clariﬁed and identiﬁed the essence of the characteristics of
the space. The process had been iterated until the syntax of
a ‘language’ and a stable and concise set of words,
representing the semantics of that language, evolved. This
language was necessarily reﬁned to a point where it could
be used to completely replace the text descriptions
associated with each of the images, and hence be used to
represent a concise and abstracted description of that
space, providing a minimalistic representation of human
understanding of that space.
The syntax of the language, MIRANDA, became a
signed word-pair:
[+, / , 7]5descriptor4.5place4
Explaining this syntax, the ﬁrst set indicates that only
one of these signs, ‘ + ’, ‘/’, or ‘7’, applies to the phrase,

where ‘ + ’ indicates the positive form of the phrase, ‘/’
indicates the in-part form of the phrase and ‘7’ indicates
the negative form of the phrase. The sign is then followed
by a word-pair, the ‘descriptor’ and ‘place’ words, each
chosen from a ﬁnite set of describing words, and a ﬁnite set
of place words, which were deﬁned during the context
analysis phase of the space. Together, they give the
adjective and noun for a ‘language’ statement that can
represent the human understanding of the environmental
element being described. For example, ‘ + inviting.path’
indicates that an inviting path is pictured, whereas ‘7
inviting.path’ indicates that the path is uninviting to
people. The two sets of words that represent the
architectural characteristics of Federation Square, in
respect to the expert audit can be seen in ﬁgure 3 and 4,
where descriptor words are on the left-hand side, and place
words on the right-hand side.
The same synthesis process was completed for the
information elements. The syntax of the information
language that was emerged was:
[+, / , 7]5descriptor4.5attribute4
To conﬁrm the richness of MIRANDA, one or many
language statements were then used to replace the detailed
prose description associated with each photograph to
ensure that the key element of every image could be
comprehensively described using the language. For example, the description associated with ﬁgure 1 was replaced by

28

J. Paay and J. Kjeldskov

Figure 3. Abstraction of MIRANDA: positive description of architectural characteristics.
the language statements: ‘7 clear.path’, ‘ + activity.ﬂoor’,
and ‘7 activity.middle’. These collected statements can be
interpreted to indicate that the paths in this area are
undeﬁned, the paving on the ground and the steps in this
area are primarily used as places to sit and watch, and the
middle of the space is clear of activity. In the interest of a
concise descriptor set, the word ‘activity’ was a composite
descriptor that emerged from the grouping process,
representing the following diﬀerent types of activities that
were extracted from the image descriptions: walking,
sitting, strolling, meeting, watching, being seen, shopping,
and dining. Future iterations of the language may have to

include these more detailed activity descriptions, depending
on the granularity of its use. To conﬁrm the succinctness of
MIRANDA, word pairs were associated diagrammatically
using the abstraction shown in ﬁgure 3 and 4 to visualize
variations and frequencies of word pairs.
This was done using layered drawing software, with each
diﬀerent coloured layer representing the links from a signed
place word, to its associated set of descriptors. This made it
possible to view diﬀerent combinations of word pairs for
comparisons with each other, and to make it possible to view
all pairs simultaneously. Each occurrence of a word pair
within the dataset was plotted on the diagram as an

Built environments for mobile guide interface design

29

Figure 4. Abstraction of MIRANDA: negative description of architectural characteristics.

additional one-point line width to the connecting link
between the words. When all the language statements had
been plotted on the diagram, the width of the word pair link
therefore represented the number of occurrences of this word
pair in the total dataset. This gave a visual form to the
‘language’ and helped to validate the choice of words in
the ﬁnite word sets by indicating whether word-pairs
were actually used in describing the space, the existence of
a link, and frequency of use of those pairs, and the width of
the link.
This abstraction of architectural characteristics provided
an additional beneﬁt as a tool for visualising a summary of

human experience of architectural elements of that
environment, that is, an overview of the physical context
of that space. In surveying the diagram, it is possible to
draw summary conclusions about the space which would
not be evident from viewing the original data, or from
merely visiting the space, because it represents a composite
view of that space, judiciously extracted from historical
understanding of human experience of architectural space,
as a lens for expert observation and analysis of this built
environment.
MIRANDA was also applied to the information layer of
Federation Square (analogue and digital signage), but for

30

J. Paay and J. Kjeldskov

the purpose of clarity and exempliﬁcation of indexing to
physical context in mobile guide interface design, the
remainder of the paper will focus on the outcomes of the
architectural analysis as illustrated in ﬁgure 3 and 4.
In analyzing ﬁgure 3, it is evident that activity in
Federation Square occurs primarily along the edges and
spaces generally have little activity in the middle. This can be
surmised because the link between ‘activity’ and ‘edge’ is
thick ( + activity.edge). We can also infer that the square
looks out at the views of its surroundings, evidenced by the
thick link between ‘visible’ and ‘surrounds’ ( + visible.surrounds). Many of the spaces have activities associated with
them, such as places that are designed speciﬁcally for an
activity such as sitting or dining, and so the link between
‘activity’ and ‘space’ is moderately thick ( + activity.space).
Similarly, landmarks can be used to orient oneself, from most
places around the square, indicated by the thick link between
‘focal’ and ‘structure’ ( + focal.structure). Other moderately
thick links can be seen between ‘major’ and ‘entrance’ ( +
major.entrance) and ‘major’ and ‘path’ ( + major.path),
indicating that Federation Square has a few main entrances
into buildings and main pathways around these structures, as
opposed to a network of small pathways and multiple
openings you might ﬁnd in the centre of an old city.
Additionally, ﬁgure 4 enhances our understanding of the
space by representing additional summary information
about it in the form of the negation of these word-pairs.
For instance, those major paths, that is, pedestrian links
between two key destinations in Federation Square, are not
inviting (7 inviting.path). They are often either a narrow gap
between two tall walls of adjacent buildings (7 humanscale.
wall) or they are down badly lit dark underground corridors
(7 light.path). When you are trying to ﬁnd a speciﬁc place
within the complex it is often diﬃcult to see your destination,
in several places you begin to follow a sign to a speciﬁc place,
but the place that you are aiming for is not visible through the
entrance indicated, leaving visitors unsure that it is the way to
go (7 visible.goal). In many places the pathway that you are
supposed to take is unclear (7 clear.path) because paths are
not speciﬁcally indicated in open spaces.
This visual abstraction of MIRANDA represents a
descriptive framework for understanding and modelling
the physical context of a public place. MIRANDA makes
available a vocabulary of a speciﬁc space that can then be
used to understand the key physical characteristics of that
built environment, and to describe the user’s surroundings
in a way that is grounded in human observation of that
place, and formed with reference to collected knowledge
about human understanding of architectural form and
graphical communication. MIRANDA is unique, in so far
as it is a systematic tool for creating an abstract
representation of physical context, which does not exist in
the literature surveyed, and yet that same literature often
laments a lack of in-depth understanding of the physical

context for which pervasive information systems are being
designed. The aim of creating MIRANDA is to provide
mobile system designers with knowledge about elements in
the user’s physical context, so that information that already
exists in the world can be indexed to in the interface. The
use of MIRANDA for this purpose is exempliﬁed below.
4. Mobile guide design
To explore the contribution of MIRANDA to the design of
physically indexed interfaces, we have designed a mobile
guide system for use at Federation Square as a proof of
concept. The design presented below is currently being
implemented as a functional prototype running on handheld computers using Bluetooth for positioning within
districts and GPRS for wireless access to the internet. The
prototype will be lab and ﬁeld-tested early 2005.
The design of the prototype guide system is based on a
combination of the ﬁndings from the Lynchian analysis of
Federation Square and MIRANDA. The Lynchian analysis
showed that clear districts can be identiﬁed within the space
of Federation Square. MIRANDA showed for each of these
districts, key architectural characteristics can be identiﬁed on
a level of abstraction that allows a conceptual image of the
space rather than a catalogue of speciﬁc physical elements.
Combining the ﬁndings from the Lynchian analysis and
MIRANDA, we have developed three overall design ideas
for a mobile guide for Federation Square, which exploits
unique characteristics of the physical space and indexes to
features of the built environment:
.

.

.

The mobile guide responds to the user’s location in
terms of one of the deﬁned districts rather than
Cartesian coordinates.
Each district is represented in the mobile guide by an
interactive photorealistic depiction of the physical
surroundings augmented with textual or symbolic
information needed to better understand the place.
Locations and instructions for navigation are expressed through rich descriptions derived from the
distinctive characteristics of the place rather than
through Euclidian coordinates.

The implementation of three design ideas in our mobile
guide system is detailed below.
4.1

Location by district

In our mobile guide for Federation Square, the user’s
location is deﬁned by four districts. These four districts
were identiﬁed by the Lynchian analysis, each with their
own distinct characteristics and a corresponding landmark.
The location districts we are using make use of people’s
ability to make sense of the physical environment in which

Built environments for mobile guide interface design

they are situated and are not deﬁned by coordinates but by
the human experience of the physical layout of the space.
Basing positioning on location within a limited number of
districts rather than on exact x, y coordinates also makes it
possible to implement positioning using, for example,
Bluetooth beacons rather than GPS.
The location districts of the mobile guide for Federation
Square and corresponding screens are illustrated in ﬁgure 5.
The information pushed to the mobile guide is tailored to
information needs within a speciﬁc district. When a user
moves into another district, their context changes, and so
does the information that appears on the screen of their
mobile device. To allow the user to align the information in
the guide to their physical surroundings, the initial screen
displays the corresponding landmark for that district.
In the following subsections, we describe the speciﬁc
design of the screens associated with only one district: the
main plaza.
4.2

Augmented interactive photorealistic depictions

When the user enters a district, an interactive photorealistic
depiction augmented with textual and symbolic information pertinent to that district is pushed to their device. For
the main plaza, MIRANDA identiﬁed six central architectural characteristics:
.
.
.
.

Activity edges.
Focal structures.
No visible goals.
Visible surrounds.

.
.

31

Major entrances and paths.
No clear paths.

These six features informed the interface design of the
screens for the main plaza.
Wishing to represent the main plaza district in the
system, we chose to use a 3608 panoramic depiction of the
plaza because MIRANDA tells us that the main plaza has
‘activity edges’ and is open in the middle. Focusing on the
edges of the plaza will match the guide to the user’s
experience of the physical space and allow them to easily
align the information presented in the system with their
physical surroundings. We use photorealistic depictions in
the design because we also know from MIRANDA that the
main plaza has ‘focal structures’. This enables users to align
the image in the interface to the architectural features of the
built environment in their current district (for example, as
seen in Pospischil et al. 2002). Subsequently, they can easily
scan through the virtual representation of the space and
index the information presented in the mobile guide to the
corresponding physical objects in their surroundings. Like
when operating a QuickTime VR movie, panning is done
by pointing on the panoramic depiction and dragging in the
desired direction.
In a situation where the physical analysis of a district
indicated that features of interest were, for example,
clustered or spread out over a very large physical area, it
might be more appropriate to use a diﬀerent depiction
such as a bird’s eye view approaching the user’s perception
of that space (Kulju and Kaasinen 2002, Laakso et al
2003).

Figure 5. Location districts of the mobile guide for Federation Square and corresponding screens.

32

J. Paay and J. Kjeldskov

Figure 6. Mobile guide for Federation Square: location
and event ﬁnding screen.

Figure 7. Mobile guide for Federation Square: navigation
screen with rich descriptions.

The main screen for the main plaza is shown in ﬁgure 6.
MIRANDA also identiﬁed a characteristic of the space
as having ‘no visible goals’. This feature of the space led to
the augmentation of the 3608 panoramic depiction of the
plaza with white text labelling visitor destinations not
clearly indicated by the architectural design. In many cases,
the actual location of activities lies behind the visible
facades, but the facades function as clear ‘focal structures’
that can be indexed to in the system, linking information
provided by the system to those visitor destinations. A
location is automatically selected when it is positioned in
the centre of the display. This is indicated by the
enlargement of the text label of that location and by
displaying the associated detailed information, as shown in
ﬁgure 6. From this screen, the user can access additional
details by clicking on the underlined links. Access to
navigation information about that location is also now
available by clicking on the ‘How do I get there?’ tab.

informed by MIRANDA identifying the architectural
characteristics of ‘activity edges’, ‘visible surrounds’, ‘major
entrances and paths’ and ‘no clear paths’. On the
navigation screen, the user is presented with rich descriptions derived from the distinctive characteristics of the
place. The descriptions used in the guide have two parts.
The ﬁrst describes the location in relation to focal
structures. The second part describes the steps taken to
get there.
Based on the knowledge from MIRANDA that activities
are located on the edges, it follows that we are able to
describe selected locations as being ‘next to’ and/or
‘opposite’ other locations on the edge of the main plaza.
We use these terms in our rich descriptions, thereby
indexing locations relative to one another. This is an
alternative to absolute location descriptions typically used
in mobile guides, for example ‘located at the corner of
Flinders and Swanston Streets’, but holds more meaning to
the users of the system, because it makes use of their
understanding of the built environment in which they are
situated.
The second part of the navigation information describes
the path which the user should take to get there. We know
from MIRANDA that paths in the main plaza are not
clearly marked but that the urban surroundings are visible.

4.3

Rich descriptions for navigation

When the user clicks on the ‘How do I get there?’ tab from
the main screen, they are presented with location and
navigation information about the selected destination. The
design of the navigation screen, as shown in ﬁgure 7, was

Built environments for mobile guide interface design

This allows us to use descriptions, such as ‘away from the
train station’ or ‘towards the river’, indexing to visible
elements of the surrounding city. MIRANDA also tells us
that access to the diﬀerent locations surrounding the main
plaza is aﬀorded by major entrances. Based on this, the
navigation screen contains an image of the entrance that
the user must pass through to get there. Again, this indexes
the information given by the mobile guide to the user’s
physical environment.
Since some of the characteristics of a physical space may
sometimes change in accordance to the time of day, season,
special events etc., the rich descriptions in the system
should be designed so that they can adapt accordingly.
5. Conclusions
As digital information becomes a part of the way we
operate in the physical world, human – computer interaction with mobile guides can beneﬁt from making use of
‘knowledge-in-the-world’ by indexing to implicit information cues in the built environment. People have a strong
ability to make sense of the physical space in which they are
situated and often make use of this when using mobile
guides in urban spaces. In order to exploit this ability in
mobile guide design, we need to better understand the role
of the user’s physical environment in deﬁning their context
and the contribution of existing information embedded in
that environment to people’s experience of it. Also, we need
to make clear connections between the user’s physical
surroundings and the information presented on their
mobile guide.
This paper has presented the outcome of a ﬁeld study
into the properties of a built environment that contributes
to people’s experience of their physical context. Synthesizing the outcome of the ﬁeld study, we have proposed a
descriptive framework, MIRANDA, which provides a
summarized abstraction of the fundamental architectural
and informational features of a built environment. The
usefulness of MIRANDA in interface design has been
exempliﬁed through the design of an indexical mobile guide
system for Federation Square, Melbourne, Australia.
Unlike other location-aware guide systems, the proposed
design explicitly uses insight into user perceptions of
architectural characteristics of the built environment to
tailor the information presented to the physical context in
which it is being used.
While the outcomes of our analysis are speciﬁc to
Federation Square, the empirical analysis of an environment used to create the MIRANDA framework could be
applied to other cases of mobile guide design for the built
environment. In physical spaces where a MIRANDAbased analysis reveals similar architectural characteristics
to Federation Square, the speciﬁc design ideas of exploring
indexicality presented above could also be applied.

33

The proposed design sketches are currently being
implemented as a functional prototype. Through laboratory- and ﬁeld-based evaluations at Federation Square, the
prototype will allow us to validate the usefulness of
MIRANDA for informing the design of mobile guides
for use in built environments.
In future research, the proposed descriptive framework
of MIRANDA should be reﬁned and validated through
further studies of other built environments, both similar to,
and diﬀerent from, Federation Square. Additionally, it
would be interesting to investigate further the dynamic
aspects of physical spaces; characteristics changing according to time of day, season, special events etc. The proposed
method does not take this issue explicitly into account
during the data collection phase and would have to be
extended for this purpose.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Steve Howard and Bharat Dave for
valuable supervision on the project and comments on the
paper. The ﬁeld study was designed and conducted by the
ﬁrst author, who was also responsible for the data analysis
and development of MIRANDA. The design of the mobile
guide for Federation Square was done in collaboration with
the second author as a part of the ‘Design and Use of
Context-Aware Mobile Multimedia Systems’ and ‘Indexical Interaction Design for Context-Aware Mobile
Computer Systems’ research projects supported by the
Danish Technical Research Council (project references 2603-0341 and 26-04-006). Graphical Federation Square
illustrations courtesy of Federation Square Management
(www.federationsquare.co.au).
References
ABOWD, D., ATKESON, C., HONG, J., LONG, S. and PINKERTON, M., 1996,
Cyberguide: a mobile context-aware tour guide. Wireless Networks, 3,
421 – 433.
AGRE, P., 2001, Changing places: contexts of awareness in computing.
Human – Computer Interaction, 16, 177 – 192.
ALEXANDER, C., ISHIKAWA, S., SILVERSTEIN, M., JACOBSON, M., FIKSDAHLKING, I. ANGEL, S., 1977, A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings,
Construction (New York: Oxford University Press).
ANDERSEN, P., 2002, Pervasive computing and space. In Organizational
Semiotics: Evolving a Science of Information Systems, L. Kecheng, R.J.
Clarke, P.B. Andersen, R. Stamper and El-Sayed Abou-Zeid (Eds.),
IFIP TC8/WG8.1, 23 – 25 July 2002, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
(Amsterdam: Kluwer) pp. 133 – 152.
AOKI, P. and WOODRUFF, A., 2000, Improving electronic guidebook
interfaces using a task-oriented design approach. Proceedings of DIS
2000, New York, USA (New York: ACM), pp. 319 – 325.
BERTIN, J., 1983, Semiology of Graphics (Wisconsin: The University of
Wisconsin Press).
BEYER, H. and HOLTZBLATT, K., 1998, Contextual Design: Deﬁning
Consumer-Centered Systems. (San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers).

34

J. Paay and J. Kjeldskov

BOHNENBERGER, T., JAMESON, A., KRÜGER, A. and BUTZ, A., 2002,
Location-aware shopping assistance: evaluation of a decision-theoretic
approach. In Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2002, Pisa, Italy (Berlin:
Springer-Verlag), pp. 155 – 169.
BORNTRÄGER, C., CHEVERST, K., DAVIES, N., DIX, A., FRIDAY, A. and
SEITZ, J., 2003, Experiments with multi-modal interfaces in a contextaware city guide. Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2003, Udine, Italy (Berlin:
Springer-Verlag), pp. 116 – 130.
BORNTRÄGER, C. and CHEVERST, K., 2003, Social and technical pitfalls
designing a tourist guide system. Proceedings of HCI in Mobile Guides,
Udine, Italy, available online at http://www.mguides.info
BOWMAN, W.J., 1968, Graphic Communication (New York: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.).
BRADLEY, N. and DUNLOP, M., 2002, Understanding contextual interactions. Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2002, Pisa, Italy, LNCS (SpringerVerlag), pp. 349 – 353.
BORCHERS, J., 2001, A Pattern Approach to Interaction Design (Chichester:
John Wiley & Sons).
CHEVERST, K., DAVIES, N. and MITCHELL, K., 2002, Exploring contextaware information push. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 6, 276 –
281.
CHEVERST, K., DAVIES, N., MITCHELL, K., FRIDAY, A. and EFSTRATIOU, C.,
2000, Developing a context-aware electronic tourist guide: some issues
and experiences. Proceedings of CHI’00, The Hague, Netherlands (New
York: ACM), pp. 17 – 24.
CHINCHOLLE, D., GOLDSTEIN, M., NYBERG, M. and ERIKSON, M., 2002,
Lost or found? A usability evaluation of a mobile navigation and
location-based service. Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2002 Pisa, Italy,
LNCS (Springer-Verlag), pp. 211 – 224.
CRABTREE, A., HEMMINGS, , T. and RODDEN, , T. 2001, Domestic legacy and
design. Proceedings of the 1st Equator Workshop on Ubiquitous
Computing in Domestic Environments, Nottingham, UK (Nottingham:
The University of Nottingham), pp. 147 – 164.
DIEBERGER, A. and FRANK, A., 1998, A city metaphor to support
navigation in complex information spaces. Journal of Visual Languages
and Computing, 9, 597 – 622.
DIX, A., RODDEN, T., DAVIES, N., TREVOR, J., FRIDAY, A. and PALFREYMAN, K., 2000, Exploiting space and location as a design framework for
interactive mobile systems. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction, 7, 285 – 321.
FITHIAN, R., IACHELLO, G., MOGHAZY, J., POUSMAN, Z. and STASKO, J.,
2003, The design and evaluation of a mobile location-aware handheld
event planner. Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2003, Udine, Italy (Berlin:
Springer-Verlag), pp. 145 – 160.
GAMMA, E., 1997, Going beyond objects with design patterns. Proceedings
ECOOP ‘97 – Object-Oriented Programming: 11th European Conference,
June 1997, Jyväskylä, Finland, p. 530.
GRAHAM, C. and KJELDSKOV, J., 2003, Indexical representations for
context-aware mobile devices. Proceeding of The IADIS e-Society
Conference, Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 373 – 380.
HAKKILA, J. and HEXEL, R., 2003, Interaction in location-aware messaging
in a city environment. Proceedings of OZCHI2003: New Directions in
Interaction: Information Environments, Media & Technology, December
2003, Brisbane, Australia (Brisbane: CHISIG), pp. 84 – 93.
HARRISON, S. and DOURISH, P., 1996, Re-placing space: the roles of place
and space in collaborative systems. Proceedings of the ACM CSCW 96
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work (New York:
ACM), pp. 67 – 76.
HERMANN, F. and HEIDMANN, F., 2002, User requirement analysis and
interface conception for a mobile, location-based fair guide. Proceedings
of Mobile HCI 2002, Pisa, Italy, LNCS (Springer-Verlag), pp. 388 – 392.

HOLLAND, S. and MORSE, D.R., 2001, AudioGPS: spatial audio in a
minimal attention interface. Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2001: Third
International Workshop on Human Computer with Mobile Devices, Lille,
France, available online at http://www.mobilechi.org
IACUCCI, G., KELA, J. and PEHONEN, P., 2004, Computational support to
record and re-experience visits. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 8,
100 – 109.
INGRAM, R., BENFORD, S. and BOWERS, J., 1996, Building virtual cities:
applying urban planning principles to the design of virtual environments.
Proceedings of ACM symposium on Virtual Reality Software and
Technology (VRST96), July, 1996 (ACM), pp. 83 – 91.
KJELDSKOV, J., 2002, Just-in-place: information for mobile device interfaces. Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2002, Pisa, Italy (Berlin: SpringerVerlag), pp. 271 – 275.
KJELDSKOV, J., HOWARD, S., MURPHY, J., CARROLL, J., VETERE, F. and
GRAHAM, C., 2003, Designing TramMate – a context aware mobile
system supporting use of public transportation. Proceedings of DUX
2003: Designing for user experiences, San Francisco, CA, USA (ACM).
KOLARI, J. and VIRTANEN, T., 2003, In the zone: views through a contextaware mobile portal. Proceedings of HCI in Mobile Guides, Udine, Italy.
KULJU, E. and KAASINEN, E., 2002, Route guidance using a 3D city model
on a mobile device. Proceedings of Mobile Tourism Support, Pisa, Italy,
available online at http://www.mguides.info
LAAKSO, K., GJESDAL, O. and SULEBAK, J.R., 2003, Tourist information
and navigation support by using D maps displayed on mobile devices.
Proceedings of HCI in Mobile Guides, Udine, Italy, available online at
http://www.mguides.info
LYNCH, K., 1960, The Image of the City (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
MCCULLOUGH, M., 2001, On typologies of situated interaction. Human –
Computer Interaction, 16, 337 –
MILLEN, D.R., 2000, Rapid ethnography: time deepening strategies for
HCI ﬁeld research. Proceedings of DIS 2000, Brooklyn, New York, USA
(New York: ACM), pp. 280 – 286.
NAKANISHI, H., KOIZUMI, S., ISHIDA, T. and ITO, H., 2004, Transcendent
communication: location-based guidance for large-scale public spaces.
Proceedings of CHI 2004, Vienna, Austria (ACM), pp. 655 – 662.
NORMAN, D., 1990, The Psychology of Everyday Things (New York: Basic
Books).
OPPERMAN, R. and SPECHT, M., 2000, A context-sensitive nomadic
information system as an exhibition guide. Proceedings of Handheld
and Ubiquitous Computing Second International Symposium, Bristol, UK
(Berlin: Springer-Verlag), pp. 127 – 142.
PAAY, J., 2003, Understanding and modeling physical environments for
mobile location aware information services. Proceedings of Mobile HCI
2003, Udine, Italy (Berlin: LNCS, Springer-Verlag), pp. 405 – 410.
PAULOS, E. and GOODMAN, E., 2004, The familiar stranger: anxiety,
comfort and play in public places. Proceedings of CHI 2004, Vienna,
Austria (New York: ACM), pp. 223 – 230.
PERSSON, P., ESPINOZA, F., SANDIN, A. and COSTER, R., 2002, GeoNotes: a
location-based information system for public spaces. Proceedings of
Mobile HCI 2002, Pisa, Italy, LNCS (Berlin: LNCS, Springer-Verlag),
pp. 151 – 173.
POSPISCHIL, G., UMLAUFT, M. and MICHLMAYR, E., 2002, Designing
LoL@, a mobile tourist guide for UMTS. Proceedings of Mobile HCI
2002, Pisa, Italy (Springer-Verlag), pp. 140 – 154.
RANDELL, C. and MULLER, H., 2000, The shopping jacket: wearable
computing for the consumer. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 4,
241 – 244.

Built environments for mobile guide interface design
RICCI, F., CAVADA, D. and NGUYEN, Q.N., 2002, Integrating travel
planning and on-tour support in a case-based recommender system.
Proceedings of Mobile Tourism Support, Pisa, Italy, available online at
http://www.mguides.info
ROCCHI, C., STOCK, O. and ZANCANARO, M., 2003, Semantic-based
multimedia representations for the museum experience. Proceedings of
HCI in Mobile Guides, Udine, Italy, available online at http://
www.mguides.info
SPARACINO, F., DAVENPORT, G. and PENTLAND, A., 2000, A city of news:
cataloguing the world wide web through virtual architecture. KOS,
Aug – Sept 2000, pp. 179 – 180.
SCHMIDT-BELZ, B. and POSLAD, S., 2003, User validation of a mobile
tourism service. Proceedings of HCI in Mobile Guides, Udine, Italy,
available online at http://www.mguides.info
TAMMINEN, S., OULASVIRTA, A., TOISKALLIO, K. and KANKAINEN, A., 2003,
Understanding mobile contexts. Proceedings of Mobile HCI 2003, Udine,
Italy (Berlin: LNCS, Springer-Verlag), pp. 17 – 31.

35

TIDWELL, J., 1999, Common Ground: A Pattern Language for Human –
Computer Interface Design. Available online at: http://www.mit.edu/
*jtidwell/interaction_patterns.html
TUFTE, E., 1990, Envisioning Information (Cheshire, Conn.: Graphics
Press).
VAINIO, T., KOTALA, O., RAKKOLAINEN, I. and KUPILA, H., 2002, Towards
scalable user interfaces in D city information systems. Proceedings of
Mobile HCI 2002, Pisa, Italy (Berlin: LNCS, Springer-Verlag), pp. 354 –
358.
VINSON, N.G., 1999, Design guidelines for landmarks to support
navigation in virtual environments. Proceedings of CHI 1999, Pittsburgh,
PA, USA (New York: ACM), pp. 278 – 285.

