Using Personas to Model Museum Visitors
Moneerah Almeshari

Computer Science
University College London
London, United Kingdom
moneerah.almeshari.17@ucl.ac.uk

John Dowell

Computer Science
University College London
London, United Kingdom
j.dowell@ucl.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
It is widely agreed that museums and other cultural heritage
venues should provide visitors with personalised interaction and
services such as personalised mobile guides, although currently
most do not. Since museum visitors are typically first-time
visitors and since their visit is for a relatively short session,
personalisation should use initial interaction data to associate
the user with a particular persona and thereby infer other facts
about the user’s preferences and needs. In this paper we report a
questionnaire-based study carried out with 105 visitors of a
Science and Technology Centre to examine the minimal features
needed to identify visitor personas. We find that museum
visitors can be clustered by their visit motivation and perceived
success factors; these clusters are found to correspond both with
Falk’s visitor categorisation and a prior classification of
exploration styles. Consequently, these two features can be used
to reliably identify the visitor persona, and therefore, can be used
for user modeling.

KEYWORDS
Museum visitors, personas, user modeling, mobile guides.
ACM Reference format:
Moneerah Almeshari, John Dowell and Julianne Nyhan. 2019. Using
Personas to Model Museum Visitors. In Proceedings of ACM 27th
Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization Adjunct
(UMAP'19 Adjunct). ACM, Larnaca, Cyprus, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5
pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3314183.3323867

1 Introduction
A consensus has emerged amongst researchers and
developers that personalisation is a priority requirement for
mobile guides (MGs) in museums and cultural heritage sites [16]. Visitors are extremely varied in terms of their motivations,
goals and needs, knowledge of the venue and their interest in
knowing and experiencing more [7]. Responding to these
individual differences requires guides to personalise the user
interface (UI) and content rather than simply offering the same
choices to all users [8].
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
UMAP'19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6711-0/19/06…$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3314183.3323867

Julianne Nyhan

Information Studies
University College London
London, United Kingdom
j.nyhan@ucl.ac.uk

Personalisation relies on a user model which is defined as “a
data structure that represents user interests, goals and
behaviours” [9]. Consequently, the quality of the user model has
a direct impact on the quality of the personalisation.
The ‘cold start problem’ occurs where the system does not
have prior information about the user and needs to construct the
user model from scratch during their first session. This is a
formidable challenge in settings like museums where visitors are
mostly first time visitors and their usage is for a relatively short
session [10]. A promising response to this involves the use of
initial data to associate a user with a particular user category and
thereby model the user or infer other facts about their
preferences and needs [10]. This approach places a user in a
category based on certain parameters and adapts the UI
accordingly. A number of adaptive cultural heritage projects
have used this method such as AVANTI [11], PEACH [12],
PeVEP [13] and INTRIGUE [14].
Visitors to museums have been extensively studied and
several visitor taxonomies have been identified. We refer to such
a visitor category as a persona, representing “an aggregate of
target users who share common behavioural characteristics”
[15]. Personas assist in focusing on some aspects of how a group
of people think, behave, communicate, what they need to
achieve and why [16]. A persona represents a particular type of
interactive product user [16]; very importantly, it identifies the
particular motivation and goals that determine the characteristic
interactive behaviour of a persona [16]. Amongst the abundance
of tools available for interaction design, personas have been
claimed to be “the most effective and fundamental” [16]. By
creating a concrete image of the user, designers gain insight into
the elements a UI should have and how a target user population
is likely to respond to those elements [16].
Personas may be reified by presenting them as fictional
characters with a name, gender, ethnicity, and even the kind of
car they drive [19]. However Cooper, Reimann [19] persuasively
argue that personas are fundamentally about motivations and
goals rather than tasks and demographics. Researchers have
focused on modelling museum visitors in relation to
personalisation using complicated features like visiting style and
simple features like age and location, while neglecting crucial
dimensions like visit motivation [8]. In this paper we focus on
the most important factors that determine a persona: motivation,
behaviour and goals.
The study exploits Falk’s taxonomy of six types of museum
visitor (i.e., personas) [17]. This robust taxonomy has been

chosen because it has been widely used and tested in museums
and Science Centres. Moreover, the individual does not have to
be physically present in the museum to supply the required
information, so the process does not necessarily impinge on their
actual museum visit.
There are two main aspects to determine when using this
approach for user modeling. First: what is the minimal set of
defining features that can reliably be used to distinguish a user’s
persona and infer information about them? Second: what are the
common preferences and attributes of those personas and how
do they guide the personalisation process?
In this paper we investigate sources and forms of evidence
needed to model museum visitors as belonging to particular
persona types based on Falk’s classification [17] using a
questionnaire. We examine whether the user model generated by
the questionnaire corresponds with the visitor’s self-assessment
of their persona type to determine the questionnaire accuracy in
identifying the visitor persona. In addition, we examine the
association between different personas and their self-assessed
exploration style characterised by [18]. Knowing such
information can assist in modeling visitor personas implicitly.

2 Related Work
Personalisation can be implemented using implicit or explicit
approaches [10]. In the implicit approach, the user profile is built
by inference from data about the user’s behaviour including
their choice. By contrast, the explicit approach builds the user
profile by asking the user for information either directly or
indirectly. The direct explicit approach asks users about their
preferences and needs which, in the indirect approach, are
inferred from answers to tangential questions about different
domain. The explicit approach is desirable when a user model
must be constructed rapidly in environments such as museums
where time is limited. Antoniou, Katifori [10] used a short
questionnaire to elicit visitor characteristics, preferences and
visiting contexts using indirect questions to provide personalised
interactive storytelling at a museum.
As discussed earlier, minimal gathered data can be used to
place the user in a category to infer more facts needed for
personalisation. Various categorisations of museum visitors
have been identified based on different constructs. Differences in
the way museum visitors prefer to learn have been characterised
with some preferring ‘mind-on’ and hands-on activities, and
others preferring to explore and reflect [19]. Differences in
expertise have also been used to differentiate museum visitors
[20, 21]. In addition, visitors’ behaviour in navigating between
exhibits within a venue has been categorised as four distinct
types [18].
Falk [17] categorised visitors on the basis of their visit
motivation which is seen as shaping both the expectation and
experience of the visit. He identifies five visitor personas:
Explorers,
Facilitators,
Experience
seekers,
Professionals/Hobbyists; and Rechargers [17]. Explorers visit to
satisfy their curiosity and have a general interest in the museum
[17]. Facilitators visit to support other people they care about
such as kids or companions; the experience of these others

directly affects the facilitators’ own experience [17]. Experience
seekers visit because they are conscious of the reputation of the
venue; they visit more for pleasure than for knowledge [17].
Professionals/ Hobbyists visit because of particular interests and
they have clear objectives for their visit [17]. Rechargers visit
seeking contemplative, spiritual and restorative experiences,
hoping to relax and recharge their energies [17]. To identify the
visitor persona, Falk has used interviews and questionnaires. A
20 element questionnaire suitable for visitors at a zoo and
aquarium has been used in [22] to study the relationship
between these identity-related motivations and their visit
conservation learning.

3 Method
A face to face questionnaire was deployed over four weeks in
2018 in Scitech, a visitor centre housing exhibits of science and
technology in Saudi Arabia. The questionnaire had been
reviewed by 4 museum curators. Arabic and English versions of
the questionnaire were created and assessed for accuracy by 2
Arab specialists of English language. The questionnaire was pilot
tested with 5 museum visitors before gathering the main data.
Individuals were invited to complete the questionnaire at the
end of their visit. The questionnaire asked visitors about their
demographics and visit. It included a set of multiple-choice
questions based on the five factors that characterise visitor
personas in Falk’s description. The five factors are visit
motivation, visit success criteria, social aspects, knowledge of
museum content, and number of visits. In addition, the
questionnaire asked participants to identify their exploration
style as one of the following [18]:
a. I see almost all objects and read object labels in detail
b. I explore and I avoid looking at objects’ information in
detail
c. I explore and I stop to see details of some objects that
attract me
d. I spent my time visiting specific exhibitions or objects
"planned before the visit" and ignoring the others
Visitors were then shown five visitor persona descriptions
(Explorer, etc) and asked to identify themselves with one. This
self-assessment provides a ground-truth reference for
determining the questionnaire’s accuracy in identifying a
visitor’s persona.
105 visitors participated in the study of whom 66 were
female, 65 adults, 34 teenagers, 3 seniors and 3 were children. It
was the first visit to Scitech for 45 participants, 39 participants
had visited 2 to 4 times previously and 21 had visited 5 times or
more.
SPSS was used to analyse the collected data which required
Chi Square tests as it is entirely categorical. Cramer’s V test was
used to indicate the strength of the relationship where a
significant effect was found.

4 Eliciting Visitor Personas
In the persona self-assessment question, 33 visitors identified
themselves as Facilitators (31.4%), 29 as Explorers (27.6%), 18 as

Experience Seekers (17.1%), 13 as Professionals/Hobbyists (12.4%)
and 12 as Rechargers (11.4%).

4.1 Main Categorisation Factors
Significant correlations are found between the self-assessed
persona type and the four factors of: motivation χ2(24, N=105)
=90.274, p =0.000 < alpha = 0.05; success criteria χ2(20, N=105)
=79.076, p =0.000; social aspect χ2(28,N=105) =52.277, p =0.01;
and number of visits χ2(8, N=105) = 23.399, p =0.003. No
significant difference between visitor types was found in relation
to knowledge of museum content χ2(16, N=105) = 25.103, p
=0.068.
TwoStep clustering was employed to classify respondents
using the four significant factors, however, it resulted in a poor
silhouette measure (0.2) for cohesion and separation of the
clusters. Examining the predictor importance index values, it
was found that social aspect and number of prior visits were the
least important factors in the clustering.

Visitor Persona

Correctly
Assigned

Incorrectly
Assigned

Facilitator

33

0

Explorer

21

8

Experience Seeker

17

1

Professional/Hobbyist

13

0

Recharger

11

1

Table 1: Accuracy of the clustering method in assigning
visitor persona; ground truth is visitors’ self-assignment.
A Chi square test indicated a significant association between
the self-assessed persona and cluster assigned persona χ2(20,
N=105) =83.108, p =0.000. 90.5% of self-assessed personas have
been identified correctly using the questionnaire (Table1). 100%
of Facilitators and Professional/Hobbyists, 94% of Experience
Seekers, 92% of Rechargers and 72% of Explorers have been
assigned to the persona accurately using the clusters produced
by the two questions. In other words, the persona that a visitor
associated themselves with reliably coincided with the persona
type found by clustering their answers to the questionnaire.
The answers of the two questions of each persona (cluster)
are mapped in Figure 2. The mapping was based on the
clustering results where it has assigned each cluster with the
most common answers to the two factors (Table 2).

Figure 1: TwoStep clustering quality indicator with
Motivation and Success Criteria
Re-running the TwoStep clustering with just the two primary
factors of motivation and success criteria produced 6 clusters
with a good silhouette measure (0.6) of cohesion and separation
(Figure 1). The question that elicits visitor motivation is “What
motivated you to visit Scitech today?”. For success criteria it is
“Which of the following means that your visit was successful,
and that you achieved what you aimed for?”

4.2 Persona Identification Accuracy and
Parameters
We then needed to establish whether these six clusters
produced by the algorithm using motivation and success criteria
factors can be associated with the five visitor personas derived
from Falk [19] (when additionally considering the Facilitator
subtypes of Parental Facilitator and Socializer Facilitator).
Examining the majority class of response in each cluster in
relation to the two primary factors of Motivation and Success
Criteria, we found each cluster can indeed be identified uniquely
with a particular persona.

Figure 2: Assigned visitor personas and their relation to
the visit motivation and the perceived success criteria
Figure 2 shows that the same motivation of our visitor
participant is found with three different personas who all
indicated “a place to learn and have fun with companions”.
Explorers and Experience Seekers can come alone to the
museum, so this answer cannot be used to uniquely identify the
visitor persona. On the other hand, results indicate that the
success criterion question alone is able to identify the five visitor

personas. However, facilitator subtypes cannot be identified
unless the motivation is also indicated.
Visitor Persona

Success Criteria

Motivation

Parental Facilitator

%100

%100

Socializer Facilitator

%100

%57

Explorer

%100

%48

Experience Seeker

%53

%71

Professional/Hobbyist

%46

%46

Recharger

%100

%100

Table 2: Persona proportions used for the mapping
presented in figure 2
Taken together, these results show first, that the
questionnaire is able to identify museum visitors’ self-assessed
personas as they relate to Falk’s visitor types: answers to the
separate questions correlate with participants’ self-assessments.
Second, clustering answers to the primary questionnaire factors
produces a set of clusters that correspond with participants’ selfassessments. This means that users of a MG can be asked the
two questions about their motivation and success criteria and
the MG will be able to reliably determine their visitor persona
within the Falk taxonomy of identity-related motivations and
consequently generate the user model.

5 Exploration Style
Participants were asked about their museum exploration style
to find if it is associated with their visitor persona. They were
asked to choose between four descriptions of exploration style,
labelled as Ant, Fish, Butterfly and Grasshopper [18]. Ants are
visitors who view almost all exhibits and follow a definite path
close to exhibits; Fish are visitors who avoid detailed exhibit
information and proximity to exhibits, preferring instead to view
at a distance from open spaces; Butterflies change direction
frequently and view most exhibits in detail but for varying times;
Grasshoppers view specific exhibits only (often planned before
the visit), spending time looking at them in detail and ignoring
other exhibits [23].
A significant association between visitor persona and selfassessed exploration style has been found χ2(15, N=105), p=0.015
with a moderately strong relationship (V=0.273) > 0.20. Results
indicate that visitor personas are divided into two groups based
on their self-identified exploration style. The greatest percentage
of Facilitators (both parental 59% and socializers 48%) indicated
that they view almost all objects and read objects details (Ants).
The other four personas indicated that they explore and stop to
see details of some objects that attract them (Butterflies),
including
the majority of
Rechargers
(79%)
and
Professionals/Hobbyists (69%) and the largest percentage of
Explorers (48%) and Experience Seekers (41%) (Table 3).

Visitor Persona

Ant

Butterfly

Fish

Grasshopper

Parental Facilitator

13

8

1

0

Socializer Facilitator

10

7

3

1

Recharger

0

8

3

0

Professional/Hobbyist

3

9

0

1

Explorer

7

10

3

1

Experience Seeker

4

7

4

2

Table 3: Visitor personas and their self-assessed
exploration style corresponding to [18] classification
In addition, table 3 shows that none of the
Professional/Hobbyist visitors have assessed their exploration
style as Fish, no Rechargers have assessed themselves as Ant and
no Rechargers or Parental Facilitators have assessed their
exploration style as Grasshopper.
Knowing the exploration style of different visitor personas
offers the opportunity to generate the user model implicitly by
recognizing individual visitor’s patterns of viewing exhibits.
However, since our results are based on self-assessment, they
would benefit from further validation with observational
methods.

6 Discussion
Personas are a widely used and highly valued technique in
interface design practice[16]. Our study has used the concept of
personas to model users into distinct sub-populations of museum
visitors. We developed a questionnaire for museum visitors that
can associate individuals with particular personas.
Our study found that visitors can be clustered into distinct
types correspond with Falk’s identity related motivation
categories using two minimal trigger features: motivation and
visit success factors. We used a set of persona definitions
produced by Falk’s studies of museum visitors to validate the
categorisation and we showed that answers to the two questions
about motivation and perceived success criteria would place
people in the same category as they would place themselves.
We explored how different visitor personas assess their
exploration style based on the classification of [18]. The most
common exploration style for each persona group of participants
was either Ant or Butterfly. This was against expectation for
Professional/Hobbyists who typically are looking for specific
exhibits and would therefore be more likely to self-identify as
Grasshoppers. On the other hand, no Rechargers assessed
themselves as either Ants or Grasshoppers and this is consistent
with their description and needs. Knowing the exploration style
of each persona can assist in detecting them automatically using
their movement patterns to provide adaptive services such as
adaptive MGs.
In conclusion, our study indicates that a MG would be able to
generate a user model from a ‘cold start’ (i.e., with no other
information) simply by asking the two questions about the user’s
motivation in visiting the museum and how they would judge
the success of their visit.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

Kabassi, K., Personalisation systems for cultural
tourism, in Multimedia services in intelligent
environments. 2013, Springer. p. 101-111.
Ardissono, L., T. Kuflik, and D. Petrelli, Personalization
in cultural heritage: the road travelled and the one
ahead. User modeling and user-adapted interaction,
2012. 22(1-2): p. 73-99.
Fidas, C.A. and N.M. Avouris. Personalization of mobile
applications in cultural heritage environments. in IISA.
2015.
Goren-Bar, D., et al., I like it–An Affective Interface for
a Multimodal Museum Guide. Proceedings of Intelligent
User Interfaces IUI’05, 2005.
Not, E. and D. Petrelli. Balancing Adaptivity and
Customisation. in International Conference on User
Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization. 2014.
Springer.
Fosh, L., et al. Gifting as a Novel Mechanism for
Personalized Museum and Gallery Interpretation. in
International Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation,
and Personalization. 2015. Springer.
Falk, J.H. and L.D. Dierking, The museum experience
revisited. 2016: Routledge.
Emmanouilidis, C., R.-A. Koutsiamanis, and A. Tasidou,
Mobile guides: Taxonomy of architectures, context
awareness, technologies and applications. Journal of
network and computer applications, 2013. 36(1): p. 103125.
Frias-Martinez, E., et al., Automated user modeling for
personalized digital libraries. International Journal of
Information Management, 2006. 26(3): p. 234-248.
Antoniou, A., et al. Capturing the visitor profile for a
personalized mobile museum experience: an indirect
approach. in UMAP (Extended Proceedings). 2016.
Halifax, Canada.
Fink, J., A. Kobsa, and A. Nill, Adaptable and adaptive
information provision for all users, including disabled
and elderly people. New review of Hypermedia and
Multimedia, 1998. 4(1): p. 163-188.

[12] Stock, O., et al., Adaptive, intelligent presentation of
information for the museum visitor in PEACH. User
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 2007. 17(3): p.
257-304.
[13] Bonis, B., et al., A platform for virtual museums with
personalized content. Multimedia tools and applications,
2009. 42(2): p. 139-159.
[14] Ardissono, L., et al., Intrigue: personalized
recommenation of tourist attractions for desktop and
hand held devices. Applied artificial intelligence, 2003.
17(8-9): p. 687-714.
[15] Miaskiewicz, T. and K.A. Kozar, Personas and usercentered dsign: How can personas benefit product design
processes? Design Studies, 2011. 32(5): p. 417-430.
[16] Cooper, A., et al., About face: the essentials of
interaction design. 2014: John Wiley & Sons.
[17] Falk, J.H., Identity and the museum visitor experience.
2016: Routedge.
[18] Véron, E. and M. Levasseur, Ethnographie de l'expositio:
l'espace, le corps et le sens. 1989: Centre Georges
Pompidou, Bibliothèque publique d'information.
[19] Luyten, K., et al. ARCHIE: disclosing a museum by a
socially-aware mobile guide. in 7th International
Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and
Cultural Heritage. 2006.
[20] Walsh, D., P. Clough, and J. Foster, User Categories for
Digital Cultural Heritage. 2016.
[21] Falk, J.H. and L.D. Dierking, Learning from museums:
Visitor experiences and the making of meaning. 2000:
Altamira Press.
[22] Falk, J.H., J. Heimlich, and K. Bronnenkant, Using
identity‐related visit motivations as a tool for
understanding adult zoo and aquarium visitors'
meaning‐making. Curator: The Museum Journal, 2008.
51(1): p. 55-79.
[23] Zancanaro, M., et al. Analyzing museum visitors’
behavior patterns. in International Conference on User
Modeling.
2007.
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Zvi_Boger/public
ation/221260782_Analyzing_Museum_Visitors'_Behavi
or_Patterns/links/0fcfd505758b80066e000000.pdf:
Springer.

