USING MOBILE DEVICES TO IMPROVE THE
INTERACTIVE EXPERIENCE OF VISITORS IN ART
MUSEUMS 1
J. A. Gallud, M. Lozano, R. Tesoriero, V. M. R. Penichet
LoUISE Research Group – Computer Science Research Institute (I3A),
Castilla-La Mancha University, 02071 Albacete, Spain
[jgallud, mlozano, ricardo, vpenichet]@dsi.uclm.es

Abstract. Many people use a PDA or a smart phone as a daily working tool.
These devices allow us to communicate; to organize our life and so on. In this
sense, the key question underlying this paper is if this new technology could be
used to enrich our experience when we visit museums or other cultural spaces.
Museums and art galleries are provided with some electronic guides in order to
do more pleasant the visit to the exhibition. It is interesting to know how to use
these new devices as a medium to guide and improve the visitors’ experience.
In this paper we describe a real system deployed in an emblematic museum in
Spain, called Cutlery Museum of Albacete. Our approach uses a PDA –offered
to visitors– that work jointly with a wireless network to show additional information about old knives, jack-knives and scissors which are showed physically
in the museum. The system supports four languages and incorporates special
functions for disabled people. The users’ satisfaction results collected during
the last 18 months demonstrate the validity of our proposal.

1 Using mobile devices in cultural environments
The application of new technologies in museums is modifying the concept of the
traditional cultural environment visit. Users can now experience a modern and enriched way to visit museums and similar cultural spaces, thanks to the use of modern
devices and sophisticated software.
This paper describes our proposal based on the use of mobile devices like PDAs to
improve the users’ experience in art and cultural spaces. Our previous experience in
this field has been successfully proved [6, 11].
There are several experiences that work in real cases with success. Technology is
used to provide visitors with the ability of interacting with the museum [7]. In a typical scenario, the visitor can use his or her sense of touch (hearing and sight) to learn
about the subject of the exhibition. Multimedia devices, 3D sound, DVD and other

1

This work was partially supported by the Spanish CICYT project TIN2004-08000-C03-01
and the grant PCC05-005-1 from Junta de Comunidades de Castilla-La Mancha.

systems are employed to make people enjoy in the museum. Emerging technologies
as virtual reality or augmented reality are also being used in these scenarios [1].
In this project we focused on the use of pocket computers (PDA) as a powerful
tool to help visitors in their visit to the museum. The challenge was to find out if our
system is a new barrier or a helpful tool in the museum, if the PDA technology would
be useful to artists and their work of arts or if there are reasons for museums to avoid
adopting this new advanced technology. They are not questions easy to answer reading former works, so we decided to define our conclusions building a complete system.
There are several former projects that have tried to use wearable computers in museums. One of the most important references in this subject is the work developed by
Ciavarella and Paternò [2, 3] in the Marble Museum of Carrara (Italy). This project is
currently working and offers to users a PDA with all the information preloaded by
means of memory cards. The PDA is able to detect when the user is entering in a
room thanks to infrared devices located at the beginning of each room.
Other Museums have already developed projects based on handled devices [10], as
the Field Museum in Chicago, Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art of New York or
Kew Gardens outside London [5, 8]. Most of them use handled devices as a useful
tool in the inventory process (see references). These projects are all prototypes and
normal visitors do not use any PDA.
The exhibitions are ideal scenarios for applying augmented reality or mixed reality. There are many HCI groups working in this area, as the work of Ciolfi [4] where
an interactive museum is designed using PDA; or the work performed by Bernt
Schiele [9] where a wearable computer is developed as an alternative to the traditional guides.
The paper is organized in the following sections: section 2 describes the system architecture. In section 3 we describe how the art piece is managed in the system. Section 4 shows some of the results collected with the first implementation of the system.
Finally the conclusions and future work are presented in section 5.

2 Description of our mobile system approach for art museums
The system we are working in has two different approaches or views. The first one
was deployed three years ago and is our test bank because is running in a real museum with real users, the Cutlery Museum of Albacete (Spain).
The first system is described in [6] and was organized in these subsystems:
- A Web application
- A mobile software based on PDA
- A system to manage the database of the Museum and to organize the exhibits
The second approach is being developed in our research laboratory and some new
features have been added which are described here.
When new functionality is going to be incorporated in the system, problems like
components reuse or system scalability arise. If there are no components reused or if
the system can not be easily scaled, one can conclude that the initial system has not
been well designed. This is the situation we faced when we decided to incorporate

new functionality and it is easy to understand, taking into account the rigorous deadlines.
On the other hand, at the time that the system was released and deployed in the
Cutlery Museum, we began to receive users’ satisfaction evaluation and a number of
improve suggestions.
The functionality desired for the system was almost the same with the addition of
the automatic positioning of PDAs and the redefinition of the user interface in order
to provide a richer experience. Additionally, we had to integrate our solution with the
previous software running in the museum.
Only our experience in mobile software for museums was useful in the design of
the new system but we could not reuse any software component..
In summary, we decided to redesign the system in order to support PDA automatic
positioning, automatic database synchronization and, the most important fact, redefine the user interface.
We are not going to describe the research aspects devoted to improve the user interface and the experience of visitors (with PDA) in the Museum. We focus on the
functional requirements affecting the architecture. So we will focus on the first two
main requirements that have been incorporated in the definition of the system: the
positioning subsystem and the automatic database synchronization subsystem. Other
important requirements we empathized were the following: modularity, technology
independence and so on.

Figure 1: Main subsystems

The positioning subsystem is responsible of giving the PDA a specific location according to a coordinate system.
The automatic database synchronization subsystem is responsible of maintaining
the coherence between both the internal and external databases. As internal database
we mean the database eventually installed in the museum. The external database refers to our specific database for supporting the positioning subsystem and the other
requirements.
Figure 2 shows a more detailed view of the components of the new system.

Figure 2: System’s components diagram
In the detailed view depicted in Figure 2 we can see the main components of the
system and the specific nodes hosting each component.
Both systems share a common functionality described as follows. A user with a
PDA wants to visit a museum; so at the entrance lobby a specific software for muse-

ums is provided to the user. In the first approach the user had to locate his or her
position in the virtual map showed in the PDA. The new version of the system introduces an improvement by which the PDA is able to detect automatically the position
of the user in the museum.
The positioning system allows the system to provide users with an unknown experience when they are visiting an art museum offering location aware information.
From the user point of view, the visitor experiencing this new way of interaction
have the following advantages against traditional interaction methods: no specific
interaction is explicitly required to access information that can be deduced from user
position; information provided to users may be filtered according to user interests
avoiding information overload. From the museum exhibitor point of view, it may
provide information about visitor’s interests and their personal opinion about what
the most interesting pieces are.
From a technological point of view, we considered the most important techniques
to solve the automatic positioning system and up to date, we have not closed the topic
with a definitive conclusion. We have considered infrared, RFID, WIFI and mixed
approaches.
Actually, we can roughly divide positioning systems into two types, those that provide user position on space (i.e. GPS, Active RFID, so on) and those that may be used
to provide a more precise position to identify an object on the space (i.e. Barcode,
passive RFID, IrDA, etc.).
The variety of positioning systems forced us to define the system separately from
the hardware employed. The system is even prepared to be used with more than one
positioning system simultaneously, increasing positioning flexibility and precision.
Figures 1 and 2 show how the client is able to interact with the environment in order
to know its position in the real building. The client program running on the PDA can
receive information from the environment in different ways: infrared sensors, RFID
tags, Bluetooth or WIFI devices or any other system available now or to appear in the
future.
Figure 2 also shows other components running on different nodes (a deployment
view of the system).

3 Managing the art piece
Art piece information may be seen on two views: catalog information and environmental information.
Catalog information is related to technical issues about pieces in the museum (i.e.
maintenance dates, revisions, value, and so on) and is written on technical language.
On the other hand, environmental information is intended for visitors (i.e. related
audios and videos, contextual information, etc) and colloquial language is used in
order to improve users’ experience and understandability.
Although environmental information is provided to visitors in general; technical
information may be extremely useful for users that are related or simply require more
information about pieces on the museum.

So, the person responsible for managing the art exhibition uses the Space Manager
application to define spaces which will host art objects. The concrete art object is
managed by means of a legacy software. This software is supposed to be in the museum before introducing the mobile solution based on PDA.
The existence of legacy software introduces the need of a Synchronizer that will
maintain the coherence between the External database and the internal one.
The Catalog component is responsible of managing technical information of an art
object with the information provided by the legacy database.

Figure 3: Class diagram

The Contents Provider provides the Client with the information to be showed and
all the information needed to maintain the state.
Figure 3 shows the class diagram of the entities we manage in our system. As we
can see, the key entity is the piece, the art piece. This model has been defined according to national and international recommendations [12] [13] allowing us to easily
deploy the system in different museums.

4 Summarizing results
A first version of the system has been running in the Cutlery Museum of Albacete,
Spain since September 2004 and during these 3 years, the museum has received over
15.000 visitors and over 3.000 visitors have used the system. An upgraded version of
the system will be deployed in summer 2007.
As we describe in detail in [11], the users’ satisfaction tests proved the validity of
the first approach of our system. A summary of these results is described here. This
section does not try to show all the results or their analysis but an overall view of the
users’ opinion.
We defined a typical usability opinion poll in which the different aspects evaluated
were the following:
- Personal opinion about the User Interface
- Aesthetic of the User Interface
- Organization of the interface
- Interpretation: easiness of understanding
- Acquisition: easiness of learning
- Easiness to perform a particular task
One of the most relevant results of the usability test was obtained from an expert
group on new technologies, though we did several experiments described in [11]. In
this group we collected 75 questionnaires with the next results:
- 60% think the user interface was nice
- 64% like the look and feel of the user interface
- 70% like the graphics used in the system
- 55% think the behavior was easy to understand
- 85% think was nice to use the system
- 85% think was very easy to select a language
- 81% found easy to select a room
- 92% found easy to select a show
- 82% think was easy to select a piece
- 80% think the system was usable
This is the informal presentation of the data collected from the expert group that
allow us to demonstrate the validity of the system . A formal and detailed report on
the usability evaluation can be found in [11].

5 Conclusions and future work
In this paper we describe advanced mobile software based on PDA applied to art
museums.
This research is based on the idea that a PDA or pocket computer can be used in
art museums to improve the users’ experience. We have applied the concepts to a
particular museum, the Cutlery Museum of Albacete (Spain).
The evolution of a real system has been described from the initial requirements to
the current ones. The most important requirement that will be introduced in a new

version of the system is a module for automatic positioning of PDA in the real building by using the available technology (infrared, RFID, etc).
The first version of the system was deployed in the Cutlery Museum of Albacete
two years ago and has been visited by over 15.000 people.
The new system is being developed in the LoUISE research group and will be deployed in spring 2007.

6 References
[1] Baber, C., Bristow, H. Cheng, S-L, Hedley, A., Kuriyama, Y., Lien, M., Pollard, J. and
Sorrell,
P.
2001.
Augmenting
Museums
and
Art
Galleries.
URL
http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/543180.html.
[2] Ciavarella, C., Paternò, F. (2003). Design Criteria for Location-aware, Indoor, PDA Applications. Proceedings Mobile HCI 2003, LNCS 2795, Springer Verlag, 131-144.
[3] Ciavarella, C., Paternò, F. (2004). The design of a handheld, location-aware guide for indoor environments. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, Vol.8 N.2, Springer Verlag, 8291.
[4] Ciolfi, L., Bannon, L. J. (2002). Designing Interactive Museum Exhibits: Enhancing visitor4curiosity through augmented artifacts. Eleventh European Conference on Cognitive Ergonomics.
[5] Field Museum in Chicago, http://www.fmnh.org/
[6] Gallud, J. A., Penichet, V. M. R., Argandoña, L. González, P., García J.A. 2005. Digital
Museums: a multi-technological approach. HCI-International Conference 2005. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates (ISBN 0-8058-5807-5) Las Vegas (USA).
[7] Grinter, R. E., Aoki, P. M., Hurst, A., Szymanski, Thornton, J. D., Woodruff, A. (2002).
Revisiting the Visit: Understanding How Technology Can Shape the Museum Visit. Proceedings of CSCW’02, ACM, 16-20.
[8] Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art of New York, http://www.museum.cornell.edu/ Kew
Gardens outside London, http://www.rbgkew.org.uk
[9] Schiele, B., Jebara, T. and Oliver, N. (2001). Sensory Augmented Computing: Wearing the
Museum's Guide. IEEE Micro 21 (3).
[10] Steele B., Human-Computer Interaction Group tests systems for electronic guides, Computer Science, Cornell University, 2002 November 2005. ISBN-10: 0-596-00803-1. ISBN13: 9780596008031. URL http://designinginterfaces.com/.
[11] Tesoriero R., Lozano M. D., Gallud J. A., Penichet V. M. R. 2007. Evaluating the users’
experience of PDA-based software applied in art museums. WebIST 2007.
[12]ICOM-CIDOC (1995). International Guidelines for Museum Object Information: The
CIDOC Information Categories. International Committee for Documentation of the International
Council
of
Museums.
ISBN
92-9012-124-6.
URL
http://www.willpowerinfo.myby.co.uk/cidoc/guide/guide.htm
[13]Carretero A., Chinchilla M., Barraca de Ramos, P., Adellac M. D., Pesquera I., Alquézar E.
(1996). Normalización documental de museos: Elementos par auna aplicación informática
de gestión museográfica. Ministerio de educación y cultura. Dirección general de Bellas Artes y Bienes Culturales. Spain. ISBN: 84-818-148-3

