International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. XXXVIII, Part 5
Commission V Symposium, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 2010

3D COLOUR IMAGING FOR CULTURAL HERITAGE ARTEFACTS
M. Hess *, S. Robson

Department of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University College London, Gower Street, London,
WC1E 6BT UK – m.hess@ucl.ac.uk, srobson@cege.ucl.ac.uk
Commission V, WG V/2
KEY WORDS: 3D documentation, 3D laser scanning, close range photogrammetry, cultural heritage, digital documentation,
heritage conservation, museum object
ABSTRACT:
This paper will discuss work in progress for the metric 3D recording and colour imaging of museum objects and the opportunities it
opens up to broaden scientific knowledge about these artefacts. The following recording technologies will be discussed and
compared with regard to imaging complex objects: phase-shift laser scanning, handheld laser scanning, high-resolution 3D colour
laser scanning, PTM and photogrammetry. The evaluation criteria will include resolution, accuracy, noise, colour fidelity, mobility of
the sensor, and data processing chain. The paper will explore the possibilities of integration of 3D image analysis with the daily work
in a museum, tailored to conservation and curation. To plan and predict results, a decision tree will be delineated suggesting one or
more techniques to answer specific curatorial or conservation questions. Integration with other imaging techniques for cultural
artefacts, including IR and UV photography, microscopic imaging and SEM surface recording will also be considered.
Available imaging technology will be discussed keeping in mind the UK museum framework; the research focus lies on the
evaluation of diverse recording technologies while producing quantitative and qualitative evidence of geometry, surface and damage.
The approach will therefore develop a bridge between conservation analysis methods and engineering metrology, by closely
analyzing the possibilities and limitations of imaging technologies, with the goal to lead to a comprehensive knowledge about
cultural heritage artefacts.
(Arnold & Geser 2008). New ways of exploiting 3D imaging
and replica in a museum context were discussed by (LaPensée
et al. 2006). A user-friendly, rapid workflow for automatic 3D
colour scan acquisition and robust 3D reconstruction was
designed together with the conservators to solve the assembly
task of thousands of fresco fragments by (B. J. Brown et al.
2008). Another excellent example of synergetic effects of
multidisciplinary documentation of a museum object, including
high-resolution 3D, is the „Mona Lisa‟ project at the Louvre
(Mohen et al. 2006).

1. INTRODUCTION
3D images are recognized by museum specialists for opening
up new technological possibilities for research, exhibition
display and education. Traditional documentation techniques
(sketches, to-scale hand and isometric drawings, text,
photographs) have been translated into modern digital
techniques. ICT (information communication technologies) and
E-Science in Arts and Humanities research towards the pursuit
of a common infrastructure; „digital humanities‟ help to mediate
the outcome to the interested public.

From an engineering point of view guidelines for optical noncontact measurement are maturing (VDI/VCI 2643, BSI PD
6461-1995, ISO/DIS 10360-8). Engineering metrology can
provide a framework in which different sensors can be
examined and compared, but the work towards an accepted
terminology and methodology is still ongoing (Beraldin et al.
2007).

Nevertheless, 3D digital surrogates, or 3D high-resolution
colour representations of digitized museum objects, have not
yet been assigned a standardized procedure in museums and
collections; they have not yet been integrated in the
conservation laboratory workflow or most computer-based
collection management systems.
Administrative factors such as high cost and data management
in museums are a key obstacle for the development of a best
practice for handling 3D digital images of museum objects
(Cooper et al. 2006). Limited financial resources restrict the
possibilities of most museums to take part in technological
research. At the same time museums seek to provide better
service for conservation, scholarly study and public display
(Evans 2006, p.552).
In the eye of some cultural heritage professionals the legacy and
importance of the 2D record is stronger than the new
technologies; 3D imaging still ranges under the label of
„expensive and time intensive methods‟ with uncertain outcome
and low efficacy versus conventional documentation and
assessment methods.

For a 3D record of a museum object to be convincing for the
cultural heritage end user as a „valuable 3D asset‟ it must show
quantifiable evidence of geometric and colorimetric fidelity;
such a high-quality dataset contributes to a comprehensive
documentation and essentially to object understanding and
accessibility.
Research at UCL seeks to enable and empower CH specialists
to actively participate, give precise specifications of the
digitizing process for the creation of digital surrogates and
digital assets which are fit for purpose and augment
understanding about the value of their artefacts.
The outcome of this research aims to leverage a broad
knowledge base and promote the technology transfer necessary
to enable CH specialists to have their voice in the decision
making process.
To this end, this paper describes the current recording
technologies at UCL, and how user testing, and recording
sensor comparisons are leading to an end user oriented decision
tree.

The need for infrastructure developments, a new understanding
and new standardized ways of communication, and the design
of feasible practical approaches for cultural heritage (CH)
professionals was highly stressed by the EPOCH project
288

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. 34, Part XXX
International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. XXXVIII, Part 5
Commission V Symposium, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 2010
The scan head is a laser triangulation system that emits a laser
line. The system measures the two-dimensional projection of
the laser line on an object, using a CCD camera to calculate a
2D profile. The width and depth of field is 50mm, the accuracy
(best fit sphere) is 15 m RMS, at a stand-off (distance to the
object) of about 100mm. The 6DOF tracking of the KCMM
combined with the 2D profile deliver a scan line ordered 3D
point cloud. The quality of the data depends on the object‟s
surface and can be adapted by varying laser brightness and
software filtering parameters according to the object properties.
After alignment of the single scans and post-processing, the
resulting polygon mesh can be textured with photographs taken
on-site.

2. 3D IMAGING TECHNOLOGY AT UCL
UCL currently owns a range of active and passive measurement
technologies, including a scanner developed specifically for
imaging cultural heritage artefacts.
2.1 3D laser scanning instrumentation/ active methods
resolu- accu- range
Scanner
tion
racy
[max in
model
points/sec [mm] [mm] m]
object size
Arius3D
0.01 to 0.8m,
Foundation
small to medium
Model 150
size museum obColour Scan3000
0.1
0.025
0.08
jects
ner (CMM)
Arius Rover
0.01 to 0.4m,
100 portable
small museum
laser scanner
3000
0.1 0.025
0.08 objects
(Tripod)
0.15 to 12m,
medium size obMetris K-Scan
19200
0.4
0.25
7.5 ject, furniture
UCL type

Faro Photon
120 with colour option
(Nikon D300)

976,000

2

+/-2

mobility
record type

none

3D colour laser
scanning, triangulation scanner

3D colour laser
scanning, trianmobile gulation scanner
3D laser scantrans- ning, Triangulat
portable ion sanner
3D laser scanning with cali0.3 to 100m,
Highly brated digital
bigger museum mobile, camera as colobjects, interiors, on site our opexteriors, archi- retion, phase shift
120 tecture
cording laser scanner

Figure 2 The Metris K-Scan was used in a Norwegian-British
collaboration to record the 12m long Solomon Island war canoe
at the British Museum. Metric survey and virtual reconstruction
was paired up with anthropological considerations about the
digital repatriation of the 3D virtual object back to the Solomon
Island source community.

Table 1 Available 3D laser scanning technologies at UCL.
The Arius3D Foundation Model 150 and the Arius 3D Rover
100 are both 3D colour laser scanners for small to medium
sized museum objects. The Foundation Model is a scan head
fixed to a CMM in a temperature and humidity-conditioned
room, whereas the Rover is portable. Both are used to create
detailed object „fingerprints‟ of a range of artefact types and
deliver 3D coloured point data at a sampling interval of 0.1mm
(~250 dots per inch) at an accuracy of the order of 0.025mm
over the surface of an object. The scanner collects 3D geometry
information through the use of a laser triangulation system,
whilst colour is simultaneously collected by analysis of the
reflected light from three RGB lasers. These capabilities confer
the researcher the ability to produce 3D models which have a
level of geometric and colour standardization that easily surpass
any other available museum recording process.
Both scanners are used at UCL to produce detailed 3D coloured
images for research and multimedia outputs.

A FARO Photon 120 laser scanner is used to document larger
objects, building interiors and exteriors. Through a vertically
spinning mirror and simultaneously horizontally rotating scan
head 3D measurements around the sensor position are collected
(angle 155º – vertical, 360º -horizontal). 3D position of a point
in space is calculated by comparing the phase shift in the
reflected laser light to a standard phase. The point cloud can be
overlaid with colour information captured with a calibrated
Nikon D300s camera.

Figure 3 The Virtual Flaxman Gallery project of UCL
Museums and Collections will discover changes in the
decorative scheme since its inauguration in 1849, and will
integrate high-resolution scans of single relief casts.
Figure 1 Digital image of a Sepik Yam Mask from UCL
Ethnographic Collections and object handling in the scanner
room by the curator. The mask was scanned as part of the UCL
E-Curator project.
For museum objects up to a size of 10 metres a Metris K-Scan
system has been deployed. It consists of a handheld scan head
and a mobile CMM (K610 camera bar) with three synchronised
linear camera units. A number of infrared LEDs built into the
handheld scan head housing are imaged and accurately tracked
by the Metris Optical CMM via triangulation. Tracking of the
scanner head delivers scan head position and orientation
(6DOF) in real time enabling the operator to freely walk around
and efficiently acquire surface scans of the measurement object
in a tracked field of about 6 x 6 x 3 metres.

Figure 4 The UCL Grant Museum of Zoology was fully
documented by 3D colour laser scan before its move to a new
location. Panoramic photographs applied on the high-resolution
scans allow the identification of the single specimens.
2.2 Image based methods/ passive recording methods
Digital close range photogrammetry is a robust and
established non-contact optical method for the documentation
of museum artefacts. The equipment consisting of a digital SLR
289

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. 34, Part XXX
International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. XXXVIII, Part 5
Commission V Symposium, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 2010
camera (Nikon D700) and lighting equipment is easily
transportable to museum and fragile objects. It is capable of
delivering high-resolution colour images ideal for the
documentation of current condition and damages on the surface
of the artefact enabling the visualisation of details of the order
of 50 m.
A workflow has been developed that allows 3D colour
documentation of small to medium sized objects by multi-photo
bundle adjustment with the help of pre-produced calibrated
boards with coded targets. A calibrated Nikon D300 or D700 is
used to produce images from a systematic range of viewpoints.
The images are processed in VMS (Vision Measurement
System (Shortis & Stuart Robson 2001) and Socetset (BAE
Systems). The final model can be output as pointcloud or TIN
(Triangulated irregular network in a number of formats: vrml
and ply being preferred).

2.3 Integration of other imaging technologies
Optical imaging methods are executed in the visible light
spectrum between about 380 nm to 760 nm, but the inclusion of
images can bring to light new insights about museum artefacts.
In conservation other image based investigation and analysis
techniques are used to answer questions about the object. The
following methods are described in detail in (Mohen et al. 2006,
p.78ff): raking light photography (visible light spectrum), UV
(ultraviolet) photography (20 to 400nm), IR (infrared)
photography record (750 to 105nm), radiography, Xray
fluorescence spectrometry, RAMAN spectrometry, multispectral imaging. Further technologies are used to deliver
detailed sub-millimetre images including confocal microscopy
and SEM (scanning electron microscope). Material analyses are
often executed with sensors that deliver spectra of samples, e. g.
FT-IR (Fourier transformed spectroscopy).
3. 3D IMAGING REQUIREMENTS FOR A MUSEUM
END USER
3.1 UK Museum framework and conservation ethics
One of the main concerns of conservators is the obligation to
conduct a careful and thorough documentation and recording of
an object as part of a collection, before and after a preservation
and conservation treatment (ICOM 2006, sec.2,20). The Codes
of Ethics call for written and pictorial records (ECCO 2004)
and for the application highest possible standards of as part of
the diagnostic examination and recording of an object. This
does not only entail a photographic overview of objects, but
extends to other forms of imaging, for example textual
description or microscopic documentation.
The UK Museum Documentation Standard is SPECTRUM
(1996) and forms the basis of work undertaken within UCL
Museums and Collections.

Figure 5 Image acquisition pipeline of a Petrie Museum object,
a fragile cartonnage mask (UC45849). The images show: coded
targets, calibration object, photogrammetry in progress, network
geometry in VMS, output results as texture mapped TIN.
Due to the high resolution and colour fidelity these 3D images
are very convincing to conservators and curators even though
the underlying geometry might not be as detailed as a 3D scan
sampled from an active technique. This type of image enables
the detailed inspection of damage and condition, being able to
mimic the use of a low magnification hand lens.

CH professionals require the documentation of provenance of
the object itself, conservation treatment, condition and the
„digital provenance‟, for example detailed information about the
imaging technology used. Curators and conservators are
generally most interested in the source or „primary data‟, e.g.
direct measurement with a high level of fidelity, rather than
„secondary
data‟
(approximation
by
triangulation,
reconstruction, multimedia output).
All steps and decisions from recording, post-processing to the
„digital born data‟ and final model should be tracked according
to the London Charter with „scholarly rigour‟ (Beacham et al.
2006).

A Polynomial Texture Map (PTM) is generated from the
mathematical synthesis of multiple digital photographs of an
object taken from a stationary camera position (Malzbender et
al. 2001). PTM is used at UCL for small to medium-sized nearflat objects.
A calibrated camera is fixed on top of the acrylic dome
structure (1030mm diameter) with a series of 64 separately
controlled electronic flashes; the object is placed underneath the
dome and the suitable lens chosen to fill the frame. A series of
images is taken with known lighting directions. All photographs
contain different highlights and shadows. A viewpoint-specific,
per-pixel reflectance function computes a model that enables
interactive lighting by the viewer.
The outcome of PTM recording is a 2D high-resolution
interactive image especially useful for the viewing of shape,
reliefs or writings on objects. Additional filters such as specular
enhancement, diffuse gain and light direction extrapolation can
be helpful for the interpretation. Ongoing research by Lindsay
MacDonald “Quantifiable colour from laser scanning and PTM
imaging” will further explore the technical limitations.

3.2 User interface testing and evaluation criteria
Within the E-Curator project for 3D colour scans for remote
object identification and assessment (2007-08) first user testing
on a newly developed prototype was executed.
The prototype consists of a web-based interface where a 3D
image is presented paired up with metadata relevant to
collections management and 3D recording (S. Robson et al.
2008). The prototype was used to explore central data storage,
and online viewing of the 3D models without the need for
specialist software.

Figure 6 Toy car image with
illumination of one tier of
flashes. Ford Sunliner UCL
Pathology Collection,
Reg.No.315678

User testing was executed throughout varied disciplines. 20
cultural heritage specialists, 13 of whom were either curators or
conservators, were interviewed in a semi-structured process
whilst browsing their 3D objects on the E-Curator prototype
interface. In a brainstorming session further requirements for
290

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. 34, Part XXX
International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. XXXVIII, Part 5
Commission V Symposium, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 2010
improved handling and viewing towards the aim of assessment
of museum objects were collected.

The development of a decision tree for cultural heritage
professionals largely depends on the analysis of taxonomies
and terminologies used by those disciplines involved.
(conservators, curators, engineers, computer graphics) to
guarantee a common semantics.

Although the project used the best available technology and has
produced object records that provide significant new
information over and above photographs used in current
museum practice, it became clear that for 3D colour scans to be
of real use to the museum and conservation specialists a higher
specification is needed. This involves higher resolution, better
rendition of colour, reflectivity and texture. Another
requirement is the ability to combine several different types of
image data in order to allow for more detailed examination and
comparison of discrete areas of interest. The issues of accuracy
and reliability of 3D records came forth during the processing
and editing of the captured data and demonstrated the
importance of track-recording the changes made. To make a 3D
model a convincing and efficient knowledge base, we need to
carefully meet the requirements identified, especially geometry
and colour.
Despite the lack of previous experience of dealing with scan
data and metadata, curators and conservators intuitively
navigating the 3D model and were very ready to engage with
the potential of the technology and keen to see it developed
further.
Further development, based on user interface design and
iterative local and remote user testing, will be conducted to
improve the functionality of the existing E-Curator prototype.

Decision making science, for example an analytical hierarchy
process, will help to develop an interface for the input of criteria
on the side of the CH professional.
A decision tree will be developed to plan and predict results in
order to suggest one or more imaging methods to answer
specific questions. Beginning with a conservation question
about a specific object with its very own „fingerprint‟ the
interface would let the museum professional define a
documentation goal (see Table 2). After certain criteria are
input, based on the classification of imaging sensors, the entries
are evaluated and in the end recommendations for imaging
tactics are made. Iterative user testing and constant sensor
information updating will enable the improvement of the
decision tree.
object
objective(s)

criteria
choices

The next section of this paper describes work in progress to
build upon this interdisciplinary collaboration in order to
progress best practice in the 3D colour recording of museum
artefacts.

surface features, material, size, condition
conservation question, digital documentation, exact metric
measurement/ object geometry, identify/ quantify damage,
monitoring/ comparison, multimedia representation, replica
sensor portability, resolution, colour (fidelity) metric accuracy,
data output
combination of one or more imaging sensors: active and
passive measurement methods, conservation science analyses,
conservation imaging

Table 2 Decision making process based on object information,
objectives and criteria
The final objective of this ongoing research is the development
of a best practice guideline so that CH professionals can
specify their aims, turn to the right technologies, and understand
and evaluate them with regard to their museum documentation
tasks. Definitions for viewing and lighting conditions with a
calibrated monitor for a persuasive and informative presentation
of a 3D surrogate of a museum object will be investigated.

3.3 Methods and evidence to generate best practice
To assess 3D imaging of museum objects from an engineering
point of view comparative imaging will produce numerical
evidence (same museum object and /or calibration objects,
different sensors). The following parameters will be taken into
account: resolution, accuracy, noise, colour fidelity, data
processing chain, while producing quantitative and
qualitative evidence of geometry. Non-contact nominal/actual
value comparison, Hausdorff distance filtering, volume
measurements of data sets will be undertaken and results plotted
into a comparison graph. These tests will help to compile a
classification of sensors with their capabilities.
(Beraldin 2009) and (Remondino 2007) have suggested
methods to produce scientific evaluation of sensor resolution
and accuracy.

4. CONCLUSIONS
The driving process in 3D colour museum object recording is to
leverage the right communication and technology transfer
between imaging technologist and CH professional, as well the
development of convincing and feasible best-practice
recommendations to ensure high-quality models, optimal
presentations and viewing conditions. A series of very detailed
recommendations have already been delivered by the EPOCH
Research Agenda (Arnold & Geser 2008).

To test colour fidelity of the sensors a full scale or small scale
Gretag Macbeth Chart is used as standard. It consists of 24
scientifically prepared coloured squares, with a lambertian
surface, including bright white and dark black. A comparison
will be produced to evaluate the colour recording consistency of
differing imaging methods.

Systematic errors of recording systems, for example intrinsic
uncertainty (Beraldin 2009, sec.3.1) and range artefacts (F Blais
et al. 2008, p.4) must be clearly explained to the end user to
avoid erroneous interpretation of imaging results.
Clear definitions of deliverables and specifications for a
museum object record and 3D model need to be agreed upon
before recording starts. The scope of recording needs to be clear
from the onset to assure that choice of sensors, settings and
subsequent processing will be successful.

Recommendations for a defined post-processing chain from
3D scan to final model will be given to ensure geometric
consistency.

Strikingly the common answer for the exigencies of a highly
convincing 3D object was geometry, but much more critically –
high-fidelity colour information. To bring both criteria for a
high-quality 3D surrogate together in a metric manner whilst
presenting them in a user-friendly environment, would not
surprisingly have great impact on the museum community.

A wealth of current projects will be used to inform a user
survey of conservators and curators in order to collect
information about the use of 3D digital images in museums and
collections and their current implementation in the daily
workflow.

291

The International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. 34, Part XXX
International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Vol. XXXVIII, Part 5
Commission V Symposium, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 2010
LaPensée, A.A., Cooper, M.J. & Parsons, J.B., 2006.
Applications in the field of cultural heritage using “off-theshelf” 3D laser scanning technology in novel ways. In M.
Ioannides, ed. The e-volution of Information Communication
Technology in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech Touches the
Past: Risks and Challenges for the 21st Century. Joint event
CIPA / VAST / EG / EuroMed 2006. Nicosia, Cyprus:
EPOCH.

REFERENCES
Arnold, D. & Geser, G., 2008. EPOCH Research Agenda for
the Application of ICT to Cultural Heritage (Full report - May
2008), Budapest, Hungary: ARCHAEOLINGA. Available at:
http://public-repository.epochnet.org/publications/RES_AGENDA/final_res.pdf [Accessed
December 1, 2009].
Beacham, R., Dennard, H. & Niccolucci, F., 2006. An
Introduction
to
the
London
Charter.
In
CIPA/VAST/EG/EuroMed, The e-volution of Information
Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage: where hi-tech
touches the past: risks and challenges for the 21st century.
Budapest: Archaeolingua.

Malzbender, T., Gelb, D. & Wolters, H., 2001. Polynomial
Texture
Maps.
Available
at:
http://www.hpl.hp.com/research/ptm/papers/ptm.pdf.

Beraldin, J., 2009. Basic Theory on Surface Measurement.
Uncertainty of 3D Imaging Systems. In IS&T - ThreeDimensional Imaging Metrology Conferenc. IS&T - ThreeDimensional Imaging Metrology Conferenc. San Jose, CA,
USA.

Remondino, F., 2007. Detailed image-based 3D geometric
reconstruction of heritage objects. In DGPF Tagungsband.
Trinational Conference of SGPBF, DGPF.
Muttenz,
Switzerland,
pp.
483-492.
Available
at:
http://www.photogrammetry.ethz.ch/general/persons/fabio_publ
.html.

Mohen, J. et al., 2006. "Mona Lisa": Inside the Painting, Harry
N. Abrams, Inc.

Beraldin, J. et al., 2007. Traceable 3D Imaging Metrology:
Evaluation
of
3D
Digitizing
Techniques
in
a
Dedicated Metrology Laboratory. In Proceedings of the 8th
Conference on Optical 3-D Measurement Techniques. Zurich,
Switzerland.

Robson, S. et al., 2008. Traceable storage and transmission of
3D colour scan data sets. In M. Ioannides & A. Addison, eds.
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Virtual
Systems and Multimedia (full papers volume). CIPA, dedicated
to Digital Heritage.
Limassol, Cyprus: Archaeoloingua/
Budapest, pp. 93-99.

Blais, F. et al., 2008. 3D Imaging from Theory to Practice: The
Mona Lisa Story. In NRC 50400, National Canadian Research
Council. SPIE Symposium on Optical Engineering &
Applications 2008. Available at: http://nparc.cisti-icist.nrccnrc.gc.ca/npsi/ctrl?action=shwart&index=an&req=8913617&l
ang=en [Accessed July 13, 2009].

Shortis, M. & Robson, S., 2001. Vision Measurement System VMS. Available at: http://www.geomsoft.com/VMS/ [Accessed
February 12, 2010].

Brown, B.J. et al., 2008. A System for High-Volume
Acquisition
and
Matching
of
Fresco
Fragments:
Reassembling Theran Wall Paintings. In ACM Transactions on
Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH 2008). Los Angeles. Available at:
http://web4.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/t.weyrich/projects/thera/theraacquisition.pdf.
Cooper, M.J., LaPensée, A.A. & Parsons, J.B., 2006. The Use
of Laser Scanning and Rapid Manufacturing Techniques for
Museum Exhibitions. In M. Ioannides, ed. The e-volution of
Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage.
Where Hi-Tech Touches the Past: Risks and Challenges for the
21st Century. joint event CIPA / VAST / EG / EuroMed 2006.
Nicosia, Cyprus: EPOCH.
ECCO, 2004. Professional Guidelines: Code of Ethics,
European
Confederation
of
Conservator-Restorers'
Organizations.,
Available
at:
http://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/tk/en/folklore/creative_h
eritage/docs/ecco_guidelines.pdf [Accessed July 9, 2008].
Evans, T., 2006. Research Policy and Directions. In L. W.
MacDonald, ed. Digital Heritage: Applying Digital Imaging to
Cultural Heritage. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 549574.
ICOM, 2006. Statues and Code of Professional Ethics
International Council for Museums, first published 1996,
Available at: http://icom.museum/ethics.html#intro [Accessed
July 9, 2008].

292

