PRESENCE 2007

A Critical Examination of Presence Applied to Cultural Heritage
Laia Pujol Tost, Erik Malcolm Champion
CEPAP, Autonomous University of Barcelona; Media Arts, COFA, University of New South Wales
{Laia.Pujol@uab.cat, e.champion@unsw.edu.au}

Abstract
This paper surveys current notions of social and cultural
presence as they may help the evaluation of cultural heritage
projects. We argue that cultural heritage requires specialized
evaluation, as key issues both connect and separate the aims
of presence researchers and cultural heritage experts. To
support this argument, three case studies of virtual heritage
evaluations are summarized, and recommendations made as
to how experimental design and evaluation may be improved
for future projects.
Keywords Cultural presence,
evaluation, virtual heritage.

social

presence,

1. Introduction
Defining cultural presence as it relates to virtual heritage
is of fundamental importance to cultural heritage
professionals, because the underlying concepts determine the
goals, design, evaluation, and level of success of the final
project. And on initial examination it may appear that as
presence research [16] has typically evaluated the sense of
‘being there”, cultural heritage researchers can adopt the
methods of the presence research community.
However, there are arguably several distinctions between
the traditional or “technological” definition of presence
research per se, and the one used in cultural heritage and
museum studies. Firstly, cultural heritage cannot accept a
definition of presence as simply “being there”. For “being”
and “there” are problematic terms if the life-experiences of
the locals are different to ours [4] and if the “there” is not
ostensive (that is to say, we cannot understand a local
cultural notion of another place just by pointing to it).
Culture is understood by ongoing usage rather than by
instantaneous depiction. So at best, there is some potential
confusion in terms of terminology; but there are also perhaps
different goals and needs between the two academic fields.
Secondly, in order for virtual technology to be accepted
and spread commercially, we need to not only evaluate
presence in specifically conditioned environments, we also
need to evaluate the usefulness of virtual environments in
situ. And for cultural environments that means replicating,
reproducing or evoking responses to experiences that are
deemed culturally significant. Such an approach immediately

raises an issue in terms of presence research, as a virtual
heritage evaluation is thus not of perceived reality, but of
perceived culturally encapsulated forms of culturally
significant reality.
For example, Riva etc al. [27] suggested that reality is
not the only component of experiencing the real-world, and
therefore non-real experiences should be included in virtual
environments. Further on, Riva et al. defend the premise (on
page 307) that cultural presence involves a “cultural
framework” and “the possibility of negotiation.” For them
this must include recognition that the experience is mediated
by digital technology, immersed in a social context, and that
it allows for ambiguity.
These claims sound reasonable to the authors, but they
create a third problem (at least in terms of virtual heritage
environments). For in Riva et al’s paper, cultural presence is
not clearly distinguished from social presence, and there is
room to reinterpret the simulated and collaborative
knowledge according to the spontaneous whims of visitors.
Is cultural presence possible in a virtual heritage environment
where people can meet and greet each other in it without
cultural constraints and where visitors have full freedom to
interpret, decide, or reconfigure the virtual heritage
environment as they wish?
A fourth problem is the extent to which a definition of
cultural presence can be usefully applied across varying
depictions of content, genres, interaction metaphors,
interfaces,
audiences,
and
hardware
/
software
configurations. For example, a paper by MacIntyre et al [21]
explains the divergence between traditional presence research
and cultural heritage using mixed reality in real places;
however, it is still not clear if a standard definition of cultural
presence is applicable to cultural heritage using stand-alone
virtual environments.

2. Defining Virtual Heritage
What is virtual heritage? Do we consider it to have a
clear definition and purpose? It is not well established in
many academic papers what virtual heritage is, and therefore
how evaluation can determine whether its goals have been
met. In a special issue of virtual heritage for presence [1], the
term is not defined by any of the papers, user trials are not
clearly explained, and what is being measured is assumed to
be understood. For example, an article on page 291 [30]

245/388

1

PRESENCE 2007
declares “users were able to concentrate on the virtual
heritage content.”
What exactly is virtual heritage content? The paper does
not say. Nor does the guest editorial define virtual heritage
[1]. To be fair, the guest editorial refers to earlier articles [26]
where domains or general reasons for virtual heritage are
mentioned. However, what separates a successful virtual
heritage environment from a failed one is not apparent. If we
do not know what virtual heritage is, it is difficult to
determine how successful individual projects are, and
perhaps impossible to create evaluations that can be used as a
standard method across different projects.
In the article entitled “Lost worlds become virtual
heritage” Chan [8] defined the goal of virtual heritage in
terms of intangible heritage:
“Virtual heritage technology aims to recreate a threedimensional navigable world and also to provide something
much less tangible -- a sense of look and feel.”
However, the above goal does not explain the
importance of heritage. In our opinion, current definitions of
virtual heritage [14], [24], [27], are not comprehensive
because they primarily focus on illustration, artistic values or
accessibility, while heritage projects also have social,
scientific and educational requirements. The unique
contextual potential of ICT is not always fully exploited
because the definition and therefore the aim of virtual
heritage are seldom examined.

2.1. Defining in Terms of Cultural Significance
There are at least three international charters that deal
with the subject of cultural heritage, and they stress the
importance of cultural significance as an aim. The Ename
ICOMOS Charter [15] suggests that the aim of digital media
(and by extension, virtual heritage), is to facilitate
understanding and appreciation, communicate, safeguard,
and respect the authenticity, as well as contribute to, promote
inclusiveness, and develop technical guidelines for cultural
heritage sites. The Ename charter defines a Cultural Heritage
Site as “a place, locality, natural landscape, settlement area,
architectural complex, archaeological site, or standing
structure that is recognized and often legally protected as a
place of historical and cultural significance.”
The ICOMOS Burra Charter [14] defines cultural
significance as involving “aesthetic, historic, scientific, social
or spiritual value for past, present or future generations.
Cultural significance is embodied in the place itself, its
fabric, setting, use, associations, meanings, records, related
places and related objects.”
More recently, the London Charter [6] aims to create
rigorous guidelines for the use of 3D technology in the
creation of virtual heritage. It recommends that 3D
visualization methods are applied with scholarly rigor, and
“accurately convey to users distinctions between evidence

2
and hypothesis, and between different levels of probability.”
Further, the last principle of the London Charter, (number 8),
says that “consideration should be given to the ways in which
the outcomes of 3D visualisation work could contribute to
the wider study, understanding, interpretation and
management of cultural heritage assets.”
Virtual heritage is an extension of both the social
sciences and ICT. It can therefore take advantage of the
specific features of ICT (interactivity, personalization,
immersivity, ubiquity, flexibility, and multimodality) to
improve not just the accessibility and comprehension of
cultural heritage sites, but also to disseminate and help a
scholarly debate of the methods and interpretations which
helped to create these reconstructions and recreations.
Given the above charters, the authors suggest that the
definition of virtual heritage should be close to the one
proposed by Stone and Ojika [37]:
“[It is]…the use of computer-based interactive
technologies to record, preserve, or recreate artifacts, sites
and actors of historic, artistic, religious, and cultural
significance and to deliver the results openly to a global
audience in such a way as to provide formative educational
experiences through electronic manipulations of time and
space.”
So the purpose of virtual heritage is to record, preserve
and recreate objects and processes of cultural significance.
According to Stone and Ojika [37], it should present the
results transparently to the public, preferably globally as well
as locally. They also suggest it should attempt to provide a
learning experience. We suggest modifying the above
definition slightly, as we wish to create a working definition
that helps evaluations improve the goals, production and user
experience of virtual heritage projects.
For example, virtual heritage projects cover cultural
significance in terms of time and space, but both together are
not necessary features; they are descriptive rather than
prescriptive. On the other hand, one omission with the above
definition regards presentation of, and interaction with,
cultural beliefs. ICOMOS, UNESCO, and other
organizations are moving towards including within the scope
of heritage the preservation and communication of intangible
heritage, which include cultural beliefs (similar or dissimilar
to our own). There is also the need to aim for authenticity of
reproduction, scholastic rigor, and sensitivity to the needs of
both audience and to the needs of the shareholders of the
original and remaining content.
Given the above, we suggest five major aims. Firstly,
virtual heritage should aim to carefully capture objects and
processes of cultural significance. Secondly it should present
this information as accurately, authentically, and engagingly
as possible. Thirdly, it should attempt to distribute in a
sensitive, safe and durable manner the project to as wide and
long-term an audience as possible. Fourthly, it should aim to

246/388

PRESENCE 2007
provide an effective and inspirational learning environment
that best communicates the intended pedagogical aims.
Fifthly, it should attempt to carefully evaluate its
effectiveness regards the above four aims in order to improve
both the project, and virtual heritage in general. Virtual
heritage researchers have admitted that in this emerging field,
proper evaluation methods are still being developed [28]. As
the presence research community is arguably the closest in
aiming for a standardized measure of engagement in virtual
heritage environments, and has a well formed academic
community that debate similar issues, it may appear that we
can adopt their tools and methods and apply them directly to
virtual heritage projects.

2.1

Presence and Realism

The concept of presence is a very complex construct,
there are many definitions by authors in many disparate
fields. These focus on specific aspects or give different
names to the same reality; they partially overlap or contradict
each other (for example, the debate over immersivity versus
presence between Slater [32] and Witmer and Singer [40]
and the many definitions of presence recorded by Schuemie
et al [31]).
Therefore, the conventional notion of presence [16],
[19], [31], as the sensation of “being there”, at a place other
than the real world, is a shorthand and highly simplified way
of expressing an internal perception of the environment and
ourselves in relation to it. The more complex explanation is
that a sense of presence is dependent on various factors:
physical immersion, perceptual realism, naturalness of the
interaction (intuitiveness and invisibility of devices,
meaningfulness and behavior of the simulated world,
possibility of social communication), emotional involvement,
attention, unconscious reactions, etc.
From this general definition, the concept of cultural
presence arises, stressing the contextual, social and symbolic,
communicational aspects of presence, and also, implicitly, a
learning aim. This view proposes interaction and empathy as
a potentially powerful way to enhance a cultural heritage
experience. Through interaction and collaboration, presence
becomes a “being –not only physically but also socially–
there and then”.
However, in the case of cultural heritage, presence
cannot always be defined as a perceptually realistic
substitution of the real world (where its effectiveness is
judged in relation to its degree of realism), because in many
cases the past does not exist anymore, or the local shared
sense of reality differs significantly from the beliefs and
conventions of the people who visit a digital simulacrum.
The philosopher Thomas Nagel raised this issue when he
asked how we could understand how a bat perceives its world
[22]; his conclusion was that bats were so sensorially distinct
from our human embodied understanding of the world that
no amount of scientific reductionism would allow us to
understand the world as they understand it.

This is also an issue for cultural learning regarding
distant or extant societies. Any explanation or reconstruction
of the past or another culture is potentially a contemporary or
western interpretation. Even more than in the case of natural
environments, there is no objectively pure reconstruction.
And to simplify archaeological interpretations into one clear
and simple narrative will also increase the risk of
banalization, of satisfying current expedient demands of the
tourist and leisure industries instead of communicating
cultural significance and the contextual values and beliefs of
intangible heritage.

2.2

The Value of Cultural Presence

Is cultural presence of value to the presence research
community? A recent paper with “Culture matters” in the
title [13] seems to conflate cultural differences with ethnic
identity, considering Chinese people who live in the
Netherlands as culturally representative of people who
remain in China. On page 123 of the Lombard et al paper
[20] that surveyed patterns in presence literature, cultural
presence did not appear even once in the frequency of
“presence” terms in titles of works table (Figure 6) and was
not mentioned in the paper at all. It has even been suggested
that virtual environments have an advantage in NOT
providing cultural cues. For example, Rüggenberg et al, [29]
suggested:
“In contrast to video conferencing systems avatar
platforms provide additional communication bandwidth
without loosing specific degrees of freedom which we much
appreciate in CMC, i.e. avatars can convey nonverbal cues
without necessarily disclosing the person’s identity or
triggering prejudices based on physical appearance (e.g.,
gender, culture, age, attractiveness).”
Presence researchers may argue that cultural presence is
synonymous with social presence, for example, Riva et al
[27] propose a cultural concept of presence as a social
construction” and this is understandable as social presence
has received more attention [38]. However, while culture is a
projection of society, and the mirror by which society can see
its own values inscribed in the external environment and
transferred to future generations, we need to separate the two,
for social presence does not necessarily lead to cultural
presence. If three hundred children rush into cybercafés
around the world to meet each other in a virtual heritage
environment, they may experience social presence. They may
well make new friends, argue, or be bullied by others. Yet
that very social engagement with others may destroy their
feeling of cultural presence, they may ignore or trivialize the
cultural information and setting of the virtual environment.
Culture may be seen as the material inscription and
embodiment of social knowledge and values passed onwards
to future generations. Yet artifacts by themselves do not give
us insight into the minds of past or foreign cultures. To evoke

247/388

3

PRESENCE 2007
a sense of another culture requires an idea of how these
material items were used to identify, define, and demarcate
social roles and privileges. We need to imagine and perceive
how they were used and why they were significant to a
society. Landscapes, clothing, and even hardware and tools,
are all material reflections of a society’s immediate goals and
long-term ideals, and they are indeed used in social
situations, but social use does not necessarily lead to locally
situated cultural understanding.
A virtual environment can also be a palimpsest
(“products of action”), where past social interactions are
layered, echoed, and carved into the fabric of the
environment and discernible to future visitors. We can see
culture, but we cannot participate in it or with it due to either
a lack of culturally constrained creative understanding or
because the originators have long since passed away.
However, this also means we are not capable of effectively
deciding whether the culture depicted in the virtual heritage
environment is complete, authentic, or desirable.
Consequently, it is not clear to either author how cultural
presence can be evaluated automatically and objectively.
Subject experts could mark virtual heritage projects in terms
of authenticity, perhaps, but as cultural learning could be
considered a spectrum (covering awareness to understanding,
and nativity to alterity), the learning abilities of the
participants should be incorporated into the evaluation
results.
Part of the aim of virtual heritage is to communicate
cultural beliefs, cultural understanding, and localized cultural
significance; the presentation nature of virtual heritage
requires some form of measuring either: subjective
comparisons between different methods and content, or,
between-group evaluations of what is effectively learnt. Both
the machine and the person play a role but it appears that
cultural presence can be only experienced and understood by
humans: it is a sensation, a state of mind caused and
mediated by technology. We are interested in the potential
accuracy and richness of a machine to simulate a past world,
but we can only judge this through our own opinions and by
observing those of others.
Hence, and even though this will complicate evaluation,
presence in cultural heritage should involve not only physical
but also cognitive and emotional aspects of digitally
mediated learning. The evaluations should also determine
whether interactive media more effectively delivers content
via procedural learning rather than prescriptive information,
and to what extent it is appreciated by the audience. Due to
the inter-subjective nature of cultural learning, we also need
to evaluate whether the virtual learning environment suitably
affords exploration, interpretation, collaboration, and
communication, and the extent to which these are
understood, appreciated, shared, preserved or extended both
inside and outside the virtual heritage environment.

4
2.3

Aims of Presence in Cultural Heritage

This point of view appears to be connected with current
positions in presence research, such as the ethnographical
[35] or the contextual [27]. Based on a more ecological
concept of the world and society, they stress the reciprocal
contribution of both the environment and the user, and define
presence through the central role of the actions allowed by
the perceived physical, cognitive and social affordances of
the environment. Seemingly, cultural heritage applications
should not be limited to just presenting images but also
encourage the reflective participation of the audience in both
the local and global issues of world heritage.
Therefore, the aims of virtual heritage, which constitute
an integration of constructivism ideas in learning, presence
current trends and Cultural Heritage aims, are the following:
Exploration: Intuitive interaction is of fundamental
importance to learning by exploration [27], [28], [35]. From
an individual point of view, understanding is achieved
through the active construction of meaning with the help of
available resources that the user identifies as affordances and
takes from the environment. The ethnographic view [35]
stresses the contribution of both the environment and the
inhabitants in the construction of meaning.
Interpretation: The importance of the meaningfulness
of the context. In a physical but especially in a cultural
environment like the one which characterizes cultural
heritage applications, reality is interpreted (the ethnographic
view focuses on the process and not the results) according to
social and symbolic codes. It is not a physical objective
environment; it is a context. Therefore, presence will be
related to the possibility of sharing this language and
communicating with the human agents. This relates to the
notion of cultural and social presence and its importance has
been demonstrated by di Blas and Gobbo [10], [11]. Their
experiences showed there is no absolute need for visual
realism as opposed to virtual or conceptual presence
(referring to the intuitiveness of the social exchange between
both environments), because this augments engagement and
reinforces the learning process.
Collaboration/communication/sharing: The previous
actions can be achieved alone but are enhanced (as was
demonstrated after Vygotsky’s theories [39]) through social
exchange. A VE is expected to be populated as the real
world, with virtual and real inhabitants who contribute to the
learning process and the sensation of presence. The
ethnographic view [27] also considers presence is not an
individual but a social phenomenon and needs to be analyzed
as such. This perspective is also important in the cultural
heritage field because we are concentrating on society [4],
and social rules are learnt or understood through observation,
exchange and imitation (for example, in games).
Thus, presence is not a goal in itself but a means aimed
at the maximization of learning or understanding. And
consequently, non-mediation or invisibility of the medium,

248/388

PRESENCE 2007
proposed by some authors as a necessary condition for
presence [18], [19] is not absolutely necessary.
On the other hand the idea of “being then and/or there”
raises, as previously mentioned, ethnological and scientific
ethical issues; therefore it should be used not to learn about
the past, but to learn about ourselves through the
comparison/conflict with different/similar cultures. In this
case, affordances would constitute a key element because not
only they would facilitate the accommodation to individual,
subjective differences, but they would also make possible the
emergence of conflicts between the expected response/use
and those the object has/had in another culture. The
comparison of both kinds of affordances would ultimately
allow the understanding of other cultures and awareness of
our own.
Taking into account these ethnological/archaeological
problems, the lessons learned through practice or evaluations,
and the social-educational role of cultural heritage, cultural
presence should be understood as the emotional, physical and
intellectual “immersion” in a simulation/reproduction of the
research process that leads to some degree of awareness,
appreciation and knowledge of the cultural significance of
locally situated beliefs and shared practices.
We can better present these ideas through an ideal
example of virtual environment in which the user personifies
an archaeologist. This kind of application puts together an
emotional engagement, a specific learning process
(discovery, involving exploration and interpretation), and an
optional social construction of meanings (by sharing and
discussing interpretations) which also provides the
methodological tools. This material is thus designed to
comply with ethical and scientific requirements and
secondly, to help provide evidence that any explanation
about the past is a present construction and should not be
taken for granted or natural. Moreover, from the
museological point of view, it also has the advantage that it
overcomes the isolation of technological exhibits evidenced
by previous evaluations [12], [17]: they become a specific
solution aimed at communicating a particular part of a single
discourse about a cultural content. In this sense, presence
transcends pure technology and encompasses the whole visit
to the heritage site.

2.4

the integration of cultural heritage and presence studies can
prove very fruitful because the latter has developed a
theoretical framework that partially matches museum needs,
and especially the methodological tools that are lacking in
cultural heritage studies. The question here is what overlaps
and what requires change or a new perspective?
Further, and despite our support of the term, the
conceptual and general methodological (factors) problems
are due to the complexity of the term, which might be trying
to label via one single term many different interrelated
elements. Can one break this term down into evaluationfriendly and customizable factors or does the notion of
cultural presence require a gestalt experience?
An additional issue that may also be problematic due to
the changing nature of presence is the fast moving nature of
virtual reality technology. Yet virtual heritage is even more
complex in what it depicts and which audience or audiences
it must satisfy [1]. How can we develop a framework of
evaluation that covers varying audiences, shareholders
(experts, teachers, indigenous people), locations of
performance (museums, homes, classrooms or lecture halls),
technologies (augmented, onsite, home-based, networked or
Internet based), and depicted sites (which typically feature
copyrighted and patented graphical or even geographical
information)?
The “technical” problems of questionnaires are not
specific to presence research but also to psychology and
other social sciences. How can we analyze and/or measure
cultural presence, how can this measure be objectively,
independently observed if it requires an internal state of
mind? Physical measurements of presence may offer
fascinating and more accurate insights into subjective
presence without being confounded by issues of
questionnaires, but how can they be used across vastly
differing large audiences, and in a way that measures
appreciation and understanding of different cultures?

3 Lessons from case studies
3.1. Building Virtual Rome

Evaluation and Extensibility

Virtual heritage applications have their own evaluation
problems to be solved; their introduction is recent and they
have not been totally adapted to the needs of the field and
especially to the dynamic and pressing requirements of
exhibitions. On the other hand, for the same reason, there has
not yet been developed a satisfactory standard methodology
of evaluation.
However, the demands of the presence community in
terms of both integration of use and suitable evaluative tools
match or converge with the needs of adaptation of presence
to the cultural heritage as stressed in this paper. Therefore,

249/388

5

PRESENCE 2007
Figure 1 Building Virtual Rome
The first case study is drawn from the visitor survey
undertaken in Rome at an exposition of over 40 virtual
heritage projects. The analyses are detailed in an unpublished
internal report and partially published [2]. The project is
relevant to this paper because although not directly interested
in presence, it tried to determine, according to visitors’
opinions and across different kinds of interfaces and
contents, the factors involved in enjoyment, immersion,
interaction, learning, engagement with the subject, and
realism, elements which are considered to influence presence.
The data were collected through the inter-contrasting of
direct observation and guided interviews at the beginning, the
end and during the visit. These asked about demographic
data, experience with computers and archaeology, opinion
about the use of technology in the cultural heritage field,
usefulness of ICT for learning, immersion and realism (with
Likert scales), and finally, enjoyment, immersion, interaction
and learning with multiple choice questions referring to the
different applications. For each one the reason was asked
through and open question. In case of no answer, we tried to
statistically relate the choice with the exhibit features and
with the rest of the data.
When asked about the meaning of “virtual
archaeology”, visitors answered that it has to do with the
reconstruction of the past. In the case of the usefulness of
ICT for exhibitions, participants replied that ICT is meant for
the improvement of dissemination, understanding and
learning. These results led to the conclusion that the public
expects to learn rather than just be transported to another
time and place.
The factor of Enjoyment was related, according to
visitors’ answers, to novelty and to a sense of presence. For
example, the virtual heritage environment of Appia Antica
was valued for its interactivity and the graphics, which
produced in the words of one visitor, “the sensation of taking
part in a wonderful trip”).
The factors involved in immersion were novelty and
richness of information as well as graphic realism. This
suggested that participants viewed immersion as being both
engagement and as a real sensation of presence. Immersion,
in other words, was a combination (or even gestalt), of
physical, emotional and intellectual factors.
The participants associated Interaction with the
system’s visible capacity of response (especially for the
projects Museo delle Pure Forme, E-Sparks, and Appia
Antica), but the quantity of information was also appreciated
(especially in the Virtual Rome Tour and Appia Antica). This
suggested that interactivity is not only physical navigation
but also a demand on the active physical and cognitive
involvement and participation of the user.
The factors the participants associated to learning were,
as expected, the richness of information but also the quality
of the reconstruction when it can be related to previous
knowledge or experiences. Nevertheless, this question had

6
the highest number of no answers and this might indicate that
people did not have the sensation of having learned any
contents, or were not able to express them, maybe because of
the number and diversity of applications or the importance of
technology.
Participants felt engaged with the subject but without
very strong results. The primary factors involved in both
positive and negative perceptions were: the capacity of
exploration or comprehension of the contents, the graphic
realism and the usability of the interface.
From a general point of view, these results put together
some specific explanative categories established by different
authors in the presence research field. Although the survey
did not emphasize the social dimension (because of the
applications’ contents and the conditions of the exhibition) it
could be understood as an initial hypothesis about the factors
operating in the cultural heritage field. To this extent it
initially appears similar to Witmer and Singer’s [40] concept
of presence as involvement because we were asking about
“feeling engaged with the subject”. However it also
demonstrated the difference between both fields: in presence,
some researchers stress the physical aspects, while here the
first factor in importance was the capacity of exploration and
comprehension; that is, the affordances offered in a
symbolically meaningful context.
From a more detailed point of view, the first factor
played a positive or negative role in all the applications,
irrespectively of the contents or the interface, which indicates
that the content is the most important element in
technological applications for cultural heritage. Graphic
realism, on the other hand, became more important for noninteractive applications. The usability of the interface was
related to the intuitiveness and awareness of the possibilities
of exploration at each moment.
The conductors of the survey also asked about one of the
most current concerns in virtual heritage, which can also be
directly related to presence: realism. Participants did not find
that looking as virtual objects was as natural as looking the
real ones, not even in those applications that pretended to be
the most realistic, like Fakespace, Virtual Rome Tour or
Appia Antica. This can be probably explained by the fact that
more elements than visual accuracy are involved in the
virtual “substitution” of the world and justify a different aims
for presence in the cultural heritage field.

250/388

PRESENCE 2007
3.2. Ename

Figure 2 Ename Museum
The empirical results of this second visitor survey are
partially published in a forthcoming Museology Journal [3]
and described in an internal (unpublished) report. The
general goal of the evaluation conducted at the Provincial
Archaeological Museum of Ename (Ename, Belgium) was to
understand the contribution of computational virtuality in
archaeological exhibitions and with that purpose in mind the
conductors of the survey compared the Timeline (a VR
application), the Feast of Thousand Years (an immersive
multimedia based on empathic approach) and Archaeolabo,
(a hands-on exhibit) as the three exhibits, constituted
different ways to approach Ename’s history and singularity.
However, the specific questions about easiness of use,
engagement, interactivity, group needs and learning can
again be connected to issues of presence.
As in the previous study, data were collected through a
complementary combination of observation, questionnaires
for the visitors and interviews with the guides (as they act as
the mediators between the audience and the exhibits). The
questionnaires asked very similar questions, but the Likert
scale answers were eliminated and more emphasis was put on
open questions because, from our previous experience at the
Rome exhibition, we considered that they where the key to
explain visitors perception and use of technological exhibits.
Given the current state of the art, we believe that so it is for
presence in the Cultural Heritage field. After collecting the
data, we categorized the qualitative answers and tried to find
associations and explanations though Chi square,
Contingency Analysis and Principal Component Analysis.
The first question asked which exhibit was the easiest to
use. The Feast obtained the best score because the easiness
was considered more from a physical viewpoint –“you only
press a button and sit to listen”– than from a strictly cognitive
point of view (only experts understood the complexity of the
exhibit, the rest of the audience were only concentrating on
the screen).

The second question asked which exhibit was the most
engaging. Here again, the Feast ranked highest, because of
its immersive and empathic effect (it showed people talking
about their life). The second main reason for engagement,
shared by Timeline and Archaeolabo, was that they allowed a
free, personalized exploration; that is, they shared an
interactive component although it was of different kind
(hands-on for Archaeolabo and computational for Timeline).
Another reason given for Timeline was that “it shows in
detail what happened”. In fact, this affirmation is related to
learning but also contains an indirect reference to visual
realism because the application contains an empty universe
and the explanation of the social dynamics is superimposed
by the texts or the guides. Engagement was also related with
previous knowledge: this is why only experts or visitors
interested in the past found Archaeoloabo engaging and
interacted with it.
The third question asked which exhibit was the most
interactive. Only younger participants or those who had
been more in contact with computers had in mind the
technological definition characteristic of the Information
Society and therefore voted for Timeline. Timeline was
considered the most interactive exhibit because it allowed a
free self-controlled exploration of the contents. This
possibility also existed using Archaeolabo, but its special
appeal was in allowing the possibility of touching real things.
The rest, again a majority, considered it was the Feast,
because they had in mind different notions of interaction.
In general, participants understood we were talking
about physical-cognitive exchange with the exhibit; that is to
say, about user controlled exploration. Others understood
“interactive” as the adjective coming from “interaction”, not
“interactivity” (the computational capacity), and they thought
about emotional exchange, which made them choose the
Feast because as a “living performance” it induced an
empathic link between the exhibit and the visitor. And yet
others in the audience took “interactive” to mean a synonym
of “relationship” in general and considered the Feast was the
only exhibit purposefully showing a link, in this case,
between the characters and the objects.
The fourth question asked which exhibit accommodated
the group needs more effectively. The answers were related
to the possibility of freely watching and exploring at the
same time. This is why the small touch screen obtained the
worst results.
The fifth question asked which exhibit was the best to
learn about the objects or the past. In this case, all
participants preferred Timeline or Archaeolabo because they
were making a clear distinction between learning
(intellectual) and engagement (emotional).
Information technology was appreciated for two reasons.
First of all, because it provided more and/or more complete
information about the subject and it allowed a flexible,
personalized exploration. The second reason was that it
allowed people to develop a general, quick idea of the
abbey’s evolution in time because it was transmitted by

251/388

7

PRESENCE 2007
visual means. In this case, the visual reconstruction helped to
learn about History (by reinforcing the guide’s or the panels’
verbal discourse through iconic means) and about
Archaeology (by providing a complete, reconstructed image
of the ruins). The reason the audience had for choosing the
Feast was that participants could learn about the past without
expending any serious effort, as museum visiting is
associated with leisure time and, people want to acquire
knowledge without having to work hard.
Ename is a more complicated case because the VR
application was located in a museum, as a specific
communicational solution, and this introduced a whole range
of museographical issues. However, the possibility of
comparing the usefulness of the technology against two other
kinds of communicational solutions allowed us to make
hypotheses about the possible factors involved in presence.
Bearing in mind these results, it may be interesting to
conduct a new study in which a more experimental approach
is adopted but again, by comparing the three kinds of
exhibits, it tries to test which are the involved factors in each
kind of exhibit (for example separate three similar groups
and let them “play” with the exhibit, using pre and post-tests,
observation, etc.).

8
(understanding and extrapolation of locally acquired cultural
knowledge), task performance, and memory recall.
Table 1 Summary of Evaluation for Palenqué
Evaluation
Task performance:
Compare to
understanding
Cultural Understanding
(multichoice). Compare
to preference, task
performance and
demographics.
Presence Survey (rank
from 1 most close to 7 as
least close for the 3
archaeological and the 4
imaginative
environments). Compare
to demographics and task
performance.

3.3 Palenqué
Environmental Recall
(multichoice).
Did participants notice
these features?
Compare to
demographics, to task
performance and to
understanding.

Figure 3 Palenqué
In this experimental study, demographic details were
recorded, namely, age, gender, PC experience, 3D
experience, and experience with the site and culture in
question. There were three groups of participants evaluated
separately, a large group of archaeology students, 24 cultural
heritage and visualization experts, and ten IT-literate people
from Lonely Planet, a travel publication company. Details of
this experiment are detailed in a journal article to be
published [4]. However the evaluations will be summarized
here purely to highlight evaluation issues of cultural
presence.
Information collected consisted of five main types of
data (Table 1). The case study was designed primarily to
assess how different forms or modes of interaction affected
subjective rankings of the environment, cultural learning

Subjective Experience of
Time Passing (ranked
from 1 to 3).
Compare to subjective
preference and to
demographics.

Content
6 information objects to find per
environment
6 multichoice questions on
Environment 1.
6 multichoice questions on
Environment 2.
6 multichoice questions on
Environment 3.
Which did you find the most
challenging to explore, find or
change things?
Which was the most interesting to
you?
Which seemed most interactive to
you?
Which did you feel most closely
represented the way Mayans saw
their own world?
Which most effectively seemed
inhabited by real people?
Which felt most like you were in the
presence of Mayan culture?
Shadow?
Real people?
How tall were Mayans compared to
modern western people?
How many real or computer scripted
people were in the site?
In future, which would you like such
environments for?
In each environment, did time pass
by quickest? (Write in descending
order of apparent speed).
Rank the environments (1 for fastest
to 3 for slowest) for how slow they
seemed to be for updating the
screen.

The statistical relation between related sentences asking
participants which environment scored highly and why, may
be seen to have special value to the understanding of cultural
presence, however there were several problems in the
experimental design that affected results, and may appear in
other virtual heritage environments.
Firstly, the site was too big for the computers to handle,
so the site was split up into three sub-sites, called
environment 1, environment 2 and environment 3. Three
different interaction methods were to be evaluated, therefore
a factorial analysis was used, and the participants split up
into subgroups, ideally nine.
However, it was found that certain interaction methods
were not suitable for certain parts of the site and

252/388

PRESENCE 2007
consequently a truncated factorial analysis was used, each
participant explored each of the three environments, but only
encountered one of two interaction methods for each
environment. A world was the term given to each specific
combination of environment and interaction method. The
above issue shows the problem of attempting to create
interaction suitable for specific archaeological sites which are
also universal enough to apply to other sites.
Secondly, the time taken to complete each task and
explore the overall environment was recorded. It was found
that some people only wanted to complete tasks because they
wanted to score well, while the archaeologists and cultural
heritage people wanted to take their time. It is very difficult
to evaluate enough different environments and interaction
methods while allowing for individual differences in
explorative interest.
Thirdly, participants were asked to rank the worlds and
the interaction modes against each other. They were ranked
in terms of user enjoyment, educational effect, and by which
environment most afforded a sense of cultural presence, and
inhabitation. The results suggested the type of environment
(the digitally simulated buildings, people, and objects)
significantly affected preferences for a specific interaction
mode, but there were also statistically significant relations
between a sense of cultural presence and inhabitation. For the
cultural studies people and the Lonely Planet employees, we
could calculate how close answers were between the different
presence questions (Table 2). Using statistical correlations,
the question of whether users felt they were in the presence
of Mayan culture, and how closely the virtual world
represented the way Mayans saw their own world were
significantly similar to each other.
Table 2: Comparing questions to ascertain shared meaning
Presence Criteria
(n=34)
Which felt most
like you were in
the presence of
Mayan culture?
Which did you
feel most closely
represented the
way Mayans saw
their own world?
Which did you
find the most
challenging to
explore, find or
change things?

Paired Presence
Criteria
Which did you
feel most closely
represented the
way Mayans saw
their own world?
Which
most
effectively
seemed inhabited
by real people?
Which did you
feel most closely
represented the
way Mayans saw
their own world?

Correlation

Significance

.860(*)

0.028

.618

0.191

.613

0.196

Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level.
Using the same approach (a combination of cultural
historians and Lonely Planet employees in a group of 34
people to see which pairs of answers to the questions had a
significantly negative correlation), we found two pairs of

near significance and slight significance. The more inhabited
worlds seemed less interesting; and more interaction seemed
to curtail the sensation of being in the presence of Mayan
culture. This seems counter to conventional presence
literature, [23] “the greater the level of control a user has,
regarding their actions in an environment, the higher the level
of presence.”
Fourthly, for the cultural understanding part of the
evaluation, participants were asked six questions for each of
the three environments. Results indicated that navigation
through the environment played more importance in their
results than how quickly they found the information. People
with game experience rushed through the tasks, but did not
remember (or understand) as much information. Hence,
being able to evaluate learning across different audiences
using strict time periods, or to hypothesize that in-world
navigation and object manipulation mastery relates to
cultural learning acquired, may be a dangerous assumption.
Fifthly, there were no direct and statistically significant
relationships between perceived and actual time passing, but
this is an interesting way to measure engagement, and may
prove more effective in virtual heritage environments with
similar interaction, or similar depicted content.
Lessons learnt were various. In terms of experimental
design, a pilot study proved invaluable in revealing
conceptual issues, but the complexity of virtual environments
does not easily support preliminary heuristic analysis or
cognitive walkthroughs. Further, navigation issues and
subjective differences in navigation between 3D experienced
and less 3D experienced partipants may prove major factors
in task performance (such as in terms of how many tasks can
be completed).
As in the earlier case studies, the audience seems to have
an interesting notion of interactivity. Results were broken
down into the archaeological environments versus hand-eye
and observation games featuring similar recreated Mayan
content. The hand-eye games were considered much more
interactive in both groups than the observation games. This is
interesting: there was not much more actual scripted
interaction in the hand-eye environments but there was more
interaction the participant could immediately control. It is
possible that interactive agency rather than the amount of
overall actual scripted interactivity in the virtual environment
is of strong importance to the user.
Participants also consistently rated the archaeological
environments as more interesting than either type of game
environment, but they were least amenable to leaving these
game environments by the prescribed time. They also
consistently ranked the archaeological environments as more
Mayan than the games, when in fact the games had the same
level of historical detail of depiction, and were based on
Mayan myths. It is possible that while game-style interaction
is more accessible to people than thematic archaeological
visualizations, they are less likely to convince people of their
authenticity. This is a serious concern for virtual heritage
design.

253/388

9

PRESENCE 2007
It may be rewarding in future to run Pearson coefficient
analysis across various terms related to cultural presence to
ensure that participants share the designer’s understanding of
key terms. It may also be possible to create wider heritage
questions that can test how well participants extrapolate
specific knowledge to other sites, but this also depends on
individual learning abilities and does not test cultural
presence in anything more than on an individual basis.

4. Conclusions
This paper attempted to establish a theoretical basis for
the introduction of presence in the cultural heritage field. To
that end, it provided some definitions of the key concepts, it
proposed some specific goals for virtual heritage and cultural
presence, and it debated the major issues arising from these
elements with regard to design and evaluation of
technological applications.
The choice of the scope is due to the fact that technology
and especially the concept of cultural presence have been
only recently introduced in the CH field; consequently, we
cannot develop fully extensive predictions if we do not
establish first the definition, goals and consequent
methodology of evaluation. A second reason is that in CH
settings, technological devices are introduced in a different
environment, where the spontaneity of exploration in a social
context is paramount and therefore raises issues that cannot
be studied in the artificial context of experiments.
In the light of these ideas and results, we have some
immediate suggestions for future virtual heritage projects and
how they are evaluated. If we had the opportunity to run the
evaluations or even re-engineer the virtual heritage design,
we would do several things differently.
Firstly we would invert the typical process of fitting the
content around the technology, and instead ask in which way
ICT methods are useful given the designer’s goals. Then, we
could adopt the most suitable technical solution and finally
test it. We believe that we are now attending to the
construction of a new paradigm, to which some researchers
[34] in the presence field are also converging through the
adoption of a more comprehensive definition of the concept.
This will allow, as we suggested in this paper, a fruitful
influence between both fields.
Secondly, we suggest that a clear definition of what is
meant by interaction should be clearly explained throughout
the development of the project. Case study 3 tried to
ascertain the effect of special types of interaction on cultural
learning, but did not realize that cultural learning is a
mishmash of interaction modes. Interaction is a highly
complex term that is not easy to design for in terms of history
and heritage, and appears to have different meanings for
different people. In this sense, interaction should be
predetermined by observation of at least one and preferably
two pilot studies — for designers seldom accurately foresee
how different visitors perceive, understand, and interact with
the site.

10
Thirdly, we also need to develop a qualitative
framework. As we are at the beginning of the introduction of
ICT in cultural heritage, it may be more prudent to
concentrate, as other authors have pointed out [34], on
gathering different kinds of complementary data and
revealing what factors are involved instead of imposing
them. Therefore studies could start by an inductive approach
aimed at building hypotheses and then adopt a deductive
approach to verify them through an experimental approach,
which allows a full statistical treatment.
Fourthly, we would probably suggest a combination of
direct observation and questionnaires for the CH settings
(where these applications are mainly used together with
formal learning environments) in order to contrast the
different data. Large control groups are desirable as it is very
difficult to ascertain the effect of demographic differences. In
spite of Slater’s accurate criticisms [33], questionnaires have
the advantage that they can obtain results about intended and
emergent knowledge. The statistical problems discussed in a
recent debate [34] can be easily “overcome” because we are
not interested in measuring and predicting presence
accurately (this belongs to the purely technical field) but in
explaining the underlying factors of its effectiveness (or lack
of it) according to the addressees’ perceptions and uses. On
the other hand, observation helps avoid interfering directly
with the user experience.
How would the above help improve virtual heritage
environments and how can we extrapolate guidelines? Clear
hypotheses on explicit quantitative data before the virtual
heritage project is built would help more clearly show what
was learnt, succeeded, or failed. Both discrete and gestalt
factors should be evaluated, as well as demographic details,
because pre-experience can be a powerful confounding
factor. The differences between test and real-world
conditions should be clearly outlined, and the sequential
order in which different virtual environments are experienced
and evaluated should be shuffled. This will help avoid
accidentally increasing boredom in the test subjects, or,
conversely, increasing their ability to complete tasks, as this
may confound the results.
Following these operational guidelines may help us
come closer to accurate and transferable evaluation standards
in line with the pedagogical aims of virtual heritage.
Emphasizing what is required to be learnt, and how it could
be best learnt by different people may also help avoid the
danger of virtual heritage merely demonstrating the technical
artistry and power of new technology, falsely claiming new
pedagogical insights through using non-representative test
audiences.
For example, video-games seem to be one of the best
technical platforms because: they are based on interactivity
and exploration [9] they include human agents, they allow a
high degree of perceptual and interaction realism, they meet
informal learning environment needs; and they are supported
by a psycho-pedagogical theory. However, they still have
issues in terms of meaningful learning, and as case study 3

254/388

PRESENCE 2007
suggests, mastery in a game may not be directly related to
mastery of cultural knowledge [4]. Further, even though
games are a fundamental part of cultural learning, current
social attitudes to computer games may affect learning about
other cultures and understanding that learning as having
scientific relevance and situational authenticity.
Where games have definitely proved successful is in the
area of learning through collaboration, and this is an area
where virtual heritage is particularly weak. Interaction does
not correspond exclusively to physical-cognitive exchange
(free, self-controlled interaction), but contains also other
aspects: the possibility of establishing an emotional link with
human agents and cultural aspects; and also (only for
experts) the capacity of the exhibit to relate different
elements providing different pieces of information and
integrating them into a more elaborated message [25].
Engagement, a major factor in virtual heritage success, is
related to three aspects: the most important, a social and
emotional connection (not provided by current VR
applications); secondly, the possibility of free exploration
and control; and third, the possibility of learning about the
past through realistic visualization. This relationship between
ICT and cultural heritage is potentially rich in the goal of
obtaining more information through flexible and personalized
exploration; in multimodal visualization of objects and
processes and in personalizable ease of use (such as in
informal learning environments such as museums).
We suggested virtual heritage must concern itself with
the presentation and understanding of cultural significance.
More specifically, the capture, creation, distribution,
educational value and feedback features of virtual heritage
projects need to be improved. To this extent, presence
research is of great interest to cultural heritage researchers.
There are however, two caveats. As virtual heritage
typically consists of highly localized information and belief
systems, attempts in the cultural field to understand and
deliver presence as a universal and constant value, are likely
to cause problems. For example, the issue of the appearance
of digital mediation may be less important in cultural
presence than in presence per se, since the aim is more to
provide a cultural filter of sort rather than to create the
illusion of an experience not mediated by technology.
And as virtual heritage typically aims to communicate
and inspire local and global audiences, we also need to
improve the pedagogical elements, not just the quality of the
technology. So for the time being, at least in the cultural
heritage field, we suggest that system immersivity, and
presence, per se, should be understood, applied and tested as
a means (for learning about ourselves in a personalized,
enjoyable way), not as an end in itself. With that in mind, we
aim to develop further the usefulness of cultural presence as a
term for evaluating the subjective experience of feeling one is
aware of, appreciative of, learning more about, or feeling
thematically immersed in not just our own past, but also in
the belief systems of other people in other societies who have
or had different values to our own.

The advantage of the concept of cultural presence
presented here is that it tries to take into account the
interface, the user and the context rather than extrapolate
standard measures of presence based on laboratory test
conditions. We do not promise that this is easily achieved,
but it does provide an opportunity for creating user-centric
content that may be deployed and experienced more widely.
Hopefully it will also help us improve the application and
comprehension of presence research in a manner more suited
to virtual heritage environments as learning environments
presenting objects and processes of cultural significance.

Acknowledgements
Some of the ideas and results presented in this paper
have been obtained during the development of the research
project CHIRON (Cultural Heritage Informatics Research
Oriented Network, 2005-2008, supported by the European
Community's Sixth Framework Programme under contract
number MEST-CT-2004-514539). Laia Pujol would like to
mention the supervision of Dr Maria Economou, coordinator
of the network at the University of the Aegean; the coparticipation of CNR-ITABC under the direction of Dr
Maurizio Forte in the first study; and finally thank both
museums’ curators and staff for their support during the
surveys. Erik Champion would like to thank the University of
Melbourne and Lonely Planet publications.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

Addison, A. C., Refsland, S. T., & Stone, R. J. (2006). Guest
Editors' Introduction: Special Issue: Virtual Heritage.
Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 15(3), iiiiv.
Forte, M., Pescarin, S., & Pujol, L. (2006). VR applications,
new devices and museums: visitors' feedback and learning. A
preliminary report. The e-volution of information technology
in Cultural Heritage. Where Hi-Tech touches the Past: risks
and challenges for the 21st century. Short papers volume.
Eurographics: 64-69.
Pujol, L. & Economou, M. (in press). Exploring the suitability
of Virtual Reality interactivity for exhibitions through an
integrated evaluation: the case of the Ename Museum.
Museology, International Scientific Electronic Journal, 4.
Champion, E & Dave, B. (2007). "Chapter 16: Dialing up the
Past." In S. Kenderdine and F. Cameron, (Eds.). Theorizing
Digital Cultural Heritage: A Critical Discourse, MIT Press:
Media in Transition series, pp. 333-348.
Champion, E., & Sekiguchi, S. (2004). Cultural Learning in
Virtual Environments. VSMM2004 Hybrid Realities: Digital
Partners, (17-19 November 2004).
Beacham, R., Niccolucci, F., Denard, H., Hermon, S., &
Bentkowska-Kafel, A. (2003). The London Charter: For The
Use Of 3-Dimensional Visualisation In The Research And
Communication Of Cultural Heritage. London: King's
Visualisation Lab.

255/388

11

PRESENCE 2007
[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

Biocca, F. and Harms, C. (2002). Defining and measuring
social presence: contribution to the networked minds theory
and measure. Presence2002 Proceedings, 7-36.
Chan, M. J. (2007, 1713 GMT, May 8). Lost worlds become
virtual heritage. Science and Space Retrieved 12 June, 2007,
from
http://edition.cnn.com/2007/TECH/science/05/08/Virtual_Her
itage/index.html
DeLeon, V., & Berry, R., Jr. (2000). Bringing VR to the
desktop: are you game? Multimedia, IEEE, 7(2), 68-72.
Di Blas, N., Gobbo, E., et al. (2005a). 3D Worlds and
Cultural Heritage: Realism vs. Virtual Presence. Museums
and the Web 2005. In Bearman, D. and Trant, J. Vancouver,
Canada.
Di Blas, N., Gobbo, E., et al. (2005b). 3D Worlds for
education: cooperation and virtual presence. Virtual reality at
Work in the 21st Century. Impact on society. Thwaites, H.
Gant, B., International Society on Virtual Systems and
Multimedia: 375-384.
Hsi, H. (2003). A study of user experiences mediated by
nomadic web content in a museum. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning 19: 308-379.
Hu, J., & Bartneck, C. (2005). Culture Matters - A Study on
Presence in an Interactive Movie. Paper presented at the
Presence 2005 Conference, London.
ICOMOS, A. (1999). The Burra Charter The Australia
ICOMOS charter for the conservation of places of cultural
significance, 1999 Australia: Australia ICOMOS.
ICOMOS. (2007). The ICOMOS Charter for the
Interpretation and Presentation of Cultural Heritage Sites
(Charter). Belgium: ICOMOS.
International Society for Presence Research. (2000). The
Concept of Presence: Explication Statement. Retrieved 12
June 2007 from http://ispr.info/
Jovet, V. (2003). Le multimedia dans l'exposition: la double
problématique de l'appropriation et de l'intégration d'un media
marginal. ICHIM03: Cultural institutions and digital
technology. Paris, Ecole du Louvre.
Lombard, M. (2000). Resources for the study of presence:
Presence explication. Retrieved 12 June, 2007, from
http://nimbus.temple.edu/~mlombard/Presence/explicat.htm
Lombard, M., & Ditton, T.B. (1997). At the heart of it all:
The concept of presence. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 3(2). Retrieved February 15, 2005 from
http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol3/issue2/lombard.html
Lombard, Matthew & Jones, Matthew T. (2005). The Big
Picture: Gaining Perspective by Examining Patterns in the
(Tele)Presence Literature. Presence 2005, 119-124.
MacIntyre, B., Bolter, J. D., & Gand, M. (2004). Presence
and the Aura of Meaningful Places. Paper presented at the 7th
Annual International Workshop on Presence (PRESENCE
2004).
From
http://www.cc.gatech.edu/ael/papers/files/presence04aura.pdf
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? The
Philosophical Review, LXXXIII (4), 435-450. Nagel, T.
(1974). What is it like to be a bat? The Philosophical Review,
LXXXIII (4), 435-450.
Nam, C. & Johnson, Steve. (2006). Measuring perceived
presence in technologically mediated environments: A
research
framework,
Presence
2006.

12

[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]
[38]

[39]

[40]

http://www.temple.edu/ispr/prev_conferences/proceedings/20
06/Nam%20and%20Johnson.pdf
Pape, D., Anstey, J., et al. (2001). Virtual Heritage at iGrid
2000. INET2001 Proceedings. Stockholm: 5-8 June 2001.
Pletinckx, D., Callebaut, D., Killebrew, A. E., & Silberman,
N. A. (2000). Virtual-reality heritage presentation at Ename.
Multimedia, IEEE, 7(2), 45-48.
Refsland, S. T., Ojika, T., Addison, A. & Stone, R. (2000).
Virtual Heritage: Breathing new life into our ancient past.
Multimedia, IEEE, 7(2), 20-21.
Riva, G., Castelnuovo, G., Gaggioli, A., & Mantovani, F.
(2002, October). Towards a cultural approach to presence.
Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Fifth Annual
International Workshop PRESENCE 2002, Porto Portugal.
Roussou, M. (2002). Virtual Heritage: from the Research Lab
to the Broad Public. Virtual Archaeology. Proceedings of the
VAST Euroconference (Arezzo 24-25 November 2000).
Niccolucci, F. Oxford, Archaeopress. 1075: 93-100.
Rüggenberg, S., Bente, G., & Krämer, Nicole C. Virtual
encounters: Creating social presence in net-based
collaborations, Presence 2005, 97-102.
Schnädelbach, H., Koleva, B., Paxton, M., Twidale, M.,
Benford, S., & Anastasi, R. (2006). The Augurscope:
Refining its Design. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments, 15(3), 278-293.
Schuemie, M. J., Van der Straaten, P., Krijn, M., & Van der
Mast, C. A. P. G. (2001). Research on presence in virtual
reality: A survey. Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 4(2), 183201.
Slater, M. (1999). Measuring Presence: A Response to the
Witmer and Singer Presence Questionnaire. Presence:
Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 8(5), 560-565.
Slater, M. (2004). How colorful was your day? Why
questionnaires cannot assess presence in virtual
environments.
Presence-Teleoperators
and
Virtual
Environments, 13(4), 484-493.
Slater, M., and Garau, M. (2007). The Use of Questionnaire
Data in Presence Studies: Do Not Seriously Likert. PresenceTeleoperators and Virtual Environments, 16(4), 447-456.
Spagnolli, A., S, Varotto, D., & Mantovani, G. (2003). An
ethnographic, action-based approach to human experience in
virtual environments. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., 59(6), 797822.
Steuer, J. (1995). Defining Virtual Reality: Dimensions
Determining Telepresence. Communication in the Age of
Virtual Reality. Biocca, F. and Levy, M. R. Hillsdale,
Erlbaum Associates: 33-55.
Stone, R. and Ojika, T. (2000). Virtual Heritage: What Next?
IEEE Multimedia 7(2): 73-74.
Swinth, K. and Blascovich, J. (2002). Perceiving and
responding to others: human-human and human-computer
social interaction in collaborative virtual environments. Paper
presented at the Proceedings of the Fifth Annual International
Workshop PRESENCE 2002, Porto Portugal.
Vigotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: the development of
higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard
University Press.
Witmer, B. G. and Singer, M. J. (1998). Measuring Presence
in virtual environments: a presence questionnaire. Presence
7(3): 225-240.

256/388

