Aalborg Universitet

A perspective on Systems Design in the Digitisation of Intangible Cultural Heritage
Rodil, Kasper
Published in:
International Journal of Intangible Heritage

Publication date:
2017
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication from Aalborg University

Citation for published version (APA):
Rodil, K. (2017). A perspective on Systems Design in the Digitisation of Intangible Cultural Heritage.
International Journal of Intangible Heritage, 12, 190-198.

General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
? Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
? You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
? You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ?
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn@aub.aau.dk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from vbn.aau.dk on: 11, 2021

A Perspective on Systems Design in the Digitisation of
Intangible Cultural Heritage

Kasper Rodil

Vol.12 2017 International Journal of Intangible Heritage 189

Digitisation systems

A Perspective on Systems Design in the
Digitisation of Intangible Cultural
Heritage
Kasper Rodil,

Department of Architecture, Design and Media Technology,
Aalborg University, Denmark

ABSTRACT
My ambition for this shorter article is to add to an earlier
discussion (see Rodil and Rehm, 2015) about the interplay of
digital systems and the digitisation of intangible heritage. In
particular, I wish to sketch some conceptualisations of what
and how we can look at the digital systems (I refer to these
as artefacts) as having certain inscribed perspectives.
Meanwhile, providing some related literature, I show one
possible road out of the complexity (with a co-responsible
design known as Participatory Design), which emerges when
certain cultures design and build artifacts together with the
purpose of containing other cultures’ intangible heritage. At
the end I provide some questions for reflection, if one is
considering digitising intangible heritage.

Keywords
digitisation of ICH, Participatory Design, digital learning
applications, virtual heritage, indigenous groups, southern
Africa, Namibia

Introduction
What I propose in this article, based on and informed
by long-term studies with indigenous groups across
southern Africa, is the experience of the outcomes of
design activities, and in particular of how collaborative
design activities can make visible certain challenges
when preserving and including ICH in the design of
technical systems. The point here is not to suggest that
there might be a ‘one-size-fits-all’ way to preserve ICH

in digital form, nor do I criticise the current more
traditional methods and long-term rationales, but
rather I take an agnostic approach and seek to enhance
the discourse on the various ways in which we can look
at ICH and its preservation through digital means.
As an academic I have an orientation towards
technology and design, and share the UNESCO view of
ICH as being vital for the communities where these

190

practices are performed, maintained and transferred to
younger generations. Obviously, maintaining
generations of accumulated knowledge and, for
instance, capturing knowledge about sustainable
interaction with the surrounding environment, will
benefit humanity in general. Having a technological
orientation means that I see ICH primarily as material
which can be digitised, enabling future generations to
benefit from it. While I explore how ICH can be handled
in a digital domain, I also seek to find new ways in which
this heritage can be performed and transferred, for
instance as Virtual Heritage. To provide an example, I
am currently engaged in transferring stories from
indigenous communities in Namibia into government
schools in the form of digital learning applications. The
underlying question for that particular project is: Why
should Namibian school children learn to read English
by reading Snow White when there are more relevant
and contextually fitting stories to tell?
But, there is a schism between digital preservation
and de facto systems design. The former concerns the
past and current practices, whereas the latter is
oriented towards preserving past and current practices
but for a digital future. The digital future here reflects
how the preserved material can become embedded into
technical systems and how this material will be handled
in future digital applications. When the ICH becomes
digital, turned into bits and bytes, it undergoes a
transformation from one form to another. This
transformation, in my view, must be scrutinised and be
a process involving curators and the communities
where ICH is grounded.
We (as a research group) always work in close
partnership with the communities governing heritage
and try to involve them actively in its management, as
has been stipulated in the Ethical Principles and Article
15 of the ICH Convention (UNESCO, 2003). First and
foremost, we are concerned to evaluate continuously
how ICH is altered when it becomes digital, but as I will
go on to describe, there are more practical and political
reasons for designing technology with the people
currently safeguarding ICH than to treat a digital system
as being a value-free place for digital content. The main
aim of this article is to promote a critical stance towards
the view of technical systems as value-free
constructions. I plan to isolate several topics when

‘going digital’ and provide examples of related work as
well as work of my own, to support the perspectives
presented.
The strategy of this short article is to expand on a
discussion started in this journal in 2015 (see Rodil and
Rehm, 2015). We intend to continue this discussion in the
future and cordially invite the readers of IJIH to join in.

Challenges when going digital
UNESCO promotes the following in Article 13, part C:
foster scientific, technical and artistic studies, as well as
research methodologies, with a view to effective
safeguarding of the intangible cultural heritage, in
particular the intangible cultural heritage in danger.
While the ambition is sound, the actual
implementation and use of technical systems in
preservation is not a trivial task. But before blindly settling
on any technical system as a tool to be used in
preservation I here provide a critical perspective on the
premises of such a system.
I refer to these technical systems as artefacts because
they are tangible products of software development. I wish
to draw a distinction between tangible cultural artefacts,
which are traditional artefacts blended and/or enhanced
by digital means (such as the Digital Ayoyote Rattle in
Martinez, 2011, or Story Beads in Reitsma et al., 2011),
and more traditional computing systems such as desktop
computers and mobile devices, where the software
pertains to preserve, host and make ICH content
accessible. An example of this could be the
HomeSteadCreator (Rodil et al., 2012), where the focus
was placed on re-contextualising recorded videos of
various indigenous practices in a 3D modelled terrain, but
on traditional systems such as laptops and mobile
devices.
Although I have a technical approach to ICH, I also have
a political view underpinning the discourse on artefacts,
which is that any artefact should be able to represent
contemporary ICH fairly and for future use, and, in that
case, introducing western technology may have
consequences for local culture. By western technology I
mean artefacts having an origin in a different context than
that in which a particular element of ICH is performed and
with a different intended use. An example could be to store

Vol.12 2017 International Journal of Intangible Heritage 191

Digitisation systems

videos of indigenous wedding practices in databases not
valorising the de facto locations of these rituals or how
people engaged in parts of these practices are not always
seen through the camera lens (for an example see, Rodil et
al., 2014). It poses the questions: what are we in fact not
recording? And how does that affect the understanding of
what has been recorded? A way to answer such a question
might begin by looking at the artefact in hand.
Merritt and Bardzell (2011, p. 5) explain the possible
consequences of introducing artefacts constructed from
somewhere else in the following way:

If daily life for a person in a developing—or less
technologically developed - country operates
according to familiar culture, then repeated,
interactive experiences with a newly introduced
Western-designed technology create new cultural

components carried by the verbal and visual
language embedded in that design. If the visual
semiotics differ enough from the surrounding
culture, the technology will either not be adopted or
will force a user to leave his or her surrounding
culture behind while interacting with the newly
implemented technology.
From a political perspective, this consequence as
highlighted by Merritt and Bardzell, is in many cases not
a desirable outcome. First and foremost this is because
of acculturation, as indigenous people when using a
technology should not adopt others’ ways of doing /
thinking without being critical about the consequences
thereof. But on a more practical level, the use and
interaction with computers should be a meaningful
experience - meaningful in the sense that the system
should reflect local viewpoints and the ICH of the users.

Plate 1
System evaluation with members of the OvaHimba tribe in Northern Namibia – The author is sitting on the upper left. This field trip and
documentation were funded and conducted with research colleagues from Namibia University of Science and Technology.
Photo: Heike Winschiers-Theophilus, courtesy of Namibia University of Science and Technology. Photo taken in Ohandungu, 2 November 2013.

192

Artefacts as social constructs
One way to look at these artefacts is from the
perspective that they are socially constructed (see
Hacking, 1999 and Leeds-Hurwitz, 2009). Floyd (1992, p.
89) provided a way of looking at the issue: There is a
given reality out there which we come across during
software development. By analysing the facts of this
reality we obtain requirements for the software. Floyd
further commented on what could be interpreted as a
particular mindset regarding ontology: Software
production is based on models representing reality.
Models should map reality correctly (ibid). And as Naur
(1985) formulated; software development is theorybuilding. The fundamental question is whether these
models, developers and artefacts can accurately map
the experienced reality of indigenous people and the
associated intangible material? Floyd (1992: p. 2)
suggests … bringing about what we hold for real, which
is the key to constructivist thinking.
I recently published a book chapter (please see Rodil, 2015)
describing many of these examples mostly pertaining to
computer graphical visualisation of indigenous knowledge
serving as a scaffold for community collected video material
of ICH.
I learned how (to me) seemingly unnecessary details and my
own assumptions of mapping the real community context in
the form of 3D modelled representations led to countless
examples of my 3D construction being unaligned with the
experienced reality of the indigenous project partners
(OvaHerero and OvaHimba communities in Namibia). For
instance, that constructs of space are not culturally neutral,
as I would prioritise mapping what I could see in the
community – not accommodating for or understanding the
meta-physical space. Or that the community members’
experienced distances between places (such as villages) are
not necessarily possible to represent in metric units. The
prototypes I developed did not include or accurately
represent these facets of their experienced reality.
Fortunately, the many indigenous people I have met since
2010 (community members from the OvaHerero and
OvaHimba tribes) have all been eager to teach me and assist
in adapting prototypes we have been busy designing
together.
Many examples have shown me how useful it is to be
able to ‘bring about what we hold for real’ thus enabling
indigenous partners to be critical towards my

understanding, yet it was also made clear to me that no
matter how true or accurate I tried to be, my assumptions
would always have to be checked.
In this way, the developer’s viewpoints (my own) were
inscribed (programmed) into the artefact and then, by
construction, laid out in the open. Whether one sees the
need to evaluate how an artefact prioritises certain
perspectives or find the need to check the assumptions of
the designer is a methodological decision. To me it is
cardinal, how else might we find a respectful synergy
between the intangible heritage and the computer?
See (Plate 1) as an example where I evaluate a prototype
with indigenous project partners. In this particular example I
evaluate a system prototype for digital storytelling with
members of the OvaHimba tribe in Northern Namibia.

Conceptualisation
The design and construction of artefacts is a multi-sided,
cultural and complex process. Often the people responsible
for, or engaged in developing artefacts do not share the
ambition of the community of this journal to preserve ICH.
The context for the use of artefacts tends to be different from
the indigenous contexts in which ICH is performed and
transferred. The technologies we can use for preservation

Figure 1
A simplified conceptualisation of an artefact and its user

Vol.12 2017 International Journal of Intangible Heritage 193

Digitisation systems

are constructed in societies and contexts which do not
innately prioritise indigenous viewpoints. Thus the ontology of
an artefact reflects a certain view of the world, namely the
view of its makers, whereas indigenous ontology and the
practices associated with it have a different orientation.
I suggest looking at this notion of an artefact a bit more
holistically (see Figure 1) and considering the intended user of
the artefact, how the user interacts with it, how the interface
links the user to the content, and ultimately how this content
is organised.
Academics in disciplines related to technical development
and ICH have conducted empirical work and provided findings
from collaborations with indigenous people on how
indigenous knowledge and intangible heritage become
altered or inaccessible to indigenous people when becoming
digital. The following examples are mostly to further point
readers of this journal to publications which report on the
challenges of when systems and intangible heritage meet.
User: It has become customary to model and design in a
way which enables users to have a meaningful experience
with an artefact. The problem is, who or where do these
models and findings come from? In many cases the data that
lays the foundation for understanding the user comes from
the behavioural sciences. But as suggested by Hendrich,
Heine and Norenzayan (2010), much of this data comes from
what they term WEIRD (Western, Educated, Industrialised,
Rich and Democratic) societies. It thus becomes problematic
if computing textbooks, empirical data and digital trends from
certain populations are used across all populations with an
assumption that they are equally meaningful.
If the user is to be an indigenous person, perhaps with
little digital literacy, one could begin by asking: how do we
understand the user concept and how can we inform the
design of the artefact with that user in mind?
Interaction: While the use of touch screens and input
devices such as a computer mouse, are, to frequent users
considered almost ‘universally’ intuitive – these interaction
protocols are programmed and learned through use. These
protocols are not necessarily familiar or meaningful to
indigenous communities or to the community context. An
example of how the physical community context and
considerations of what constitutes meaningful system
interaction forced the change from input devices and personal

computers to touch-based mobile devices is found in Rodil et
al. (2012). To provide an example; starting in 2010 working
with the OvaHerero in Eastern Namibia I used laptops for the
prototypes, yet the Elders commented on how unnatural a
computer mouse was to use, it was in fact making them not
want to use the prototype. Furthermore, the laptop would
suffer from the heat and the sand as local practice directed us
to carry out studies outside. From that point our prototypes
became touch-based and on tablets. One could ask, is the
user-artefact interaction meaningful in relation to local
practices and the local physical context?
Interface: The interface of the artefact is responsible for
connecting the user with the digitised ICH in ways that are
meaningful to that user. As researchers and developers, we
habitually interact with interfaces and have become
accustomed to a dominant western orientation and use of
metaphors still bearing the legacy of the office of the 1980s.
These metaphors are contextual, cultural and not necessarily
transferable to indigenous curators. The problem is that we
have a tendency to take the recognition of these metaphors
for granted. Several authors have provided support for
re-thinking how we present and find information on interfaces
linking indigenous users and indigenous content. Kapuire and
Blake (2011) describe how indigenous community members
were obstructed from finding their own recorded videos by a
textual database search and developer defined meta-data.
The interface did not allow the curators to find their own
content in a way that was meaningful to them. Furthermore,
the authors comment that even the concepts of ‘uploading’
and ‘user login’ were not readily understood by indigenous
community members.
Another example is presented by Winschiers-Theophilus
et al. (2008). The authors provide insights from usability
studies of a bush encroachment decision-support system in
Namibia with local rangeland managers. The authors report
that the reason for its initial failure was:

A highly effective and efficient system with an inference
engine operating on rules originating from western-style
paradigms, assuming a rational, logical, and abstract
decision process, with a transparent rule justification was
unacceptable for the local community. (ibid: p.2).
Based on their studies, the authors promote the idea that
community members should be involved from the beginning in
the conceptualisation of any such system.

194

Content: How ICH content as data (such as video, text,
coordinates, 3D points etc.) is organised might hinder use or
violate the protocols of the community providing the data.
Christie (2004, p. 1) makes the following point:
Databases are not innocent objects. They carry within them
particular culturally and historically contingent assumptions
about the nature of the world, and the nature of knowledge;
what it is, and how it can be preserved and renewed.
One of the problems with data structures is that they
might already be defined before any data is entered. As
outsiders to these communities and their ICH, we cannot
readily understand how this content should be structured. In
particular, the use of meta-data has been criticised by
several authors (see for example, Hughes and Dallwitz,
2007; Verran et al., 2007). In our own work in Namibia with
the OvaHerero Elders we attempted to organise videos
spatially in a 3D terrain in the locations where the practices
(and recordings) were performed, as these are highly
location-specific (see for example Rodil, 2015). But as with
other approaches, a visual-spatial form of organisation
comes with its own set of challenges which have to be
solved together with the indigenous community.
These four elements (user, interaction, interface and
content), in a rather simplistic conceptualisation, all make
visible some of the challenges being submerged, yet are
very influential when we look at the ‘culture’ of digital
systems.

Finding an approach to handle the digital
challenge
In our research group we have the following premise for
our projects. If the current ICH curators are the rightful
owners and future curators, they must be partners in the
design of artefacts to ensure that the ICH is fairly handled by
the system. But as they are to be future curators of this
digitised ICH they must be considered users as well. If they
are considered as users, surely the system must deliver a
meaningful experience to them?
We are able to develop artefacts useful in familiar
contexts, but we cannot inform design from these familiar
contexts when the context of use is in an indigenous setting.
What is a meaningful system for people in indigenous
contexts might contradict what is meaningful to us, as we

do not belong to these communities. Instead of forcing
indigenous people to adopt or unlearn their own
perspectives, we should seek to adapt our own
perspectives.
Since an artefact can be viewed as a social construct and
becomes a tangible product of the programmer’s
interpretation of reality and the practices of the community
he/she belongs to, the artefact becomes a manifestation from
a certain perspective. But, how do we check our own
assumptions and the perspectives embedded in the
technology?
This challenge, in our experience, can be handled by being
careful when selecting the design methodology – essentially
the processes, values and theoretical foundations for
designing.
As we argue (Rodil and Rehm, 2015), for the active
inclusion of indigenous people as decision-making partners in
the design and preservation processes, we seek to co-design
artefacts carrying the local viewpoints rather than those of the
developers. The design methodology we suggest using is
called Participatory Design.

Participatory Design
Participatory Design is a design approach where
developers engage in close partnerships with users in
designing more suitable systems. This design approach can
be viewed through the following three rationales (see for
example Greenbaum and Halskov, 1993):
· C
 onstructivism as what we hold for real is the result of
our personal and cultural interpretation of the world
around us (Vrasidas, 2000).
·T
 ools and methods as approaches to make it possible for
participants and researchers to work together on
design. These methods and tools are characterised by
being practical, accessible and usable for participants as
they may be unable to program / use the tools of the
professional (see for example Spinuzzi, 2005).
· P
 olitical standpoint it is a core value that participants
should be empowered to shape their own digital
futures and artefacts of which they will eventually
become the users (Kensing and Blomberg, 1998).

Vol.12 2017 International Journal of Intangible Heritage 195

Digitisation systems

It is a tenet of Participatory Design to carry out design
activities in the users’ context as developers need to learn
about the context in which they will be used (by
ethnographic methods and contextual dialogues);
meanwhile participants (termed co-designers) learn about
the technology so they can become critical and influence
the technological construction.
For more recent works on Participatory Design in
indigenous community settings, consider reading Sabiescu
et al., (2014); Winschiers-Goagoses et al., (2012); Zaman et
al., (2015); Winschiers-Theophilus et al., (2010); Puri et al.,
(2004); Rodil, Winschiers-Theophilus and Jensen, (2012),
and lipito Mendonca and Van Zyl (2014).
These iterative design processes and interactions of
design taking place in indigenous communities create a
field of tension where perspectives literally meet on the
digital interface between world-views.
During our long commitment to indigenous
communities in Namibia, I have experienced the way in
which design has become an alternative approach to ICH,
and the processes of carrying ICH into the design of
artefacts becomes an act of preservation and
understanding of the tacit knowledge surrounding
practices (see for example Rodil et al., 2014). These
experiences have also highlighted how our own cultural
practices embedded in technology design contain hidden
cultural assumptions that influence the design (see for
example Rodil, 2015).
Co-designing artefacts that no longer mimic
western culture, community and society with the
assistance of indigenous communities might be useful
in other ways. The insights gained might in turn benefit
those societies that usually create technology – namely
the western world. While this is a positive by-product,
the main objective is to construct artefacts which are
meaningful to indigenous curators. I would claim that
the inclusion of indigenous communities is (at least)
two-fold:
A: to make useful systems, developers need
assistance from members of the indigenous
communities - who best know their own world - to
design systems relying on a local ontology.

B: to promote access (see for example Dyson,
2004) to digitised ICH for indigenous communities
to be able to curate and digitise by themselves.
Designing artefacts together becomes a dialogue
between people with different view-points, as when we are
co-designing we are laying on the table some of the tacit
intangible properties which we each hold for real.

Conclusion
I do not have a perfect solution to these digital
challenges, as all projects and the material to be preserved
are highly contextual and situational. I would, as a starting
point, suggest that when engaging in digitising ICH,
researchers could reflect on the following questions:
- Who is the artefact intended for, who is the user?
-D
 oes it prioritise certain perspectives at the expense
of others?
- Is the interaction and interface meaningful for the
current curators of ICH?
- How is the content organised? Is it accessible and
does the organisation follow local protocols and
values?
-H
 ow are the curators involved in, or prohibited from
shaping their own digital future?
With our approaches to digitising and preserving ICH
for future generations, often for the benefit of the
marginalised, we must be mindful about introducing
artefacts which might run counter to our ambitions of fairly
representing, collecting and ensuring curators’ own
access to their own ICH. I propose a critical stance which
might not only shed light on the particular perspectives
these digital systems are ‘born’ with, but should also
involve and invite in the expertise of the communities who
are already performing and maintaining their own
intangible heritage. Meanwhile, there is a tremendous
potential in digitising and bringing back ICH into school
curricula for indigenous populations in forms that appeal
to young people interested in technology - perhaps in the
form of stories and life perspectives, which might better
resonate with indigenous world-views. One way to
approach this challenge is to bring about what we hold for
real by ensuring that we meet and start a dialogue.

196

REFERENCES
·Christie, M., 2004. ‘Computer databases and aboriginal knowledge’ in International Journal of Learning in

Social Contexts, 1: pp. 4-12.
·Dyson, L. E., 2004. ‘Cultural issues in the adoption of information and communication technologies by
indigenous Australians’ in Proceedings cultural attitudes towards communication and
technology, Murdoch University Perth, pp. 58-71.
·Ethical Principles for Safeguarding Intangible Cultural Heritage, Available from: ‘http://www.unesco.org/culture/
ich/en/ethics-and-ich-00866’ [Accessed 11 April 2017)
·Hacking, I., 1999. The social construction of what?, Harvard University Press.
·Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., and Norenzayan, A., 2010. ‘The weirdest people in the world’ in Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 33 (2-3): pp. 61-83.
·Hughes, M. and Dallwitz, J., 2007. ‘Ara irititja: Towards culturally appropriate IT best practice in remote
indigenous Australia’ in Dyson, L., Hendriks, M., and Grant, S. (eds). Information Technology and
Indigenous People. Hershey, PA: Information Science Publishing: pp. 146-158.
·Iipito Mendonca, H. N. K. and Van Zyl, I., 2014. ‘Youth empowerment: The role of service design and mobile
technology in accessing reproductive health information’ in Proceedings of the 13th Participatory
Design Conference: Short Papers, Industry Cases, Workshop Descriptions, Doctoral Consortium
Papers, and Keynote Abstracts, vol. 2, PDC '14, New York, NY, USA. ACM: pp. 103-106.
·Kapuire, G. K. and Blake, E., 2011. ‘An attempt to Re-Organise digital indigenous knowledge representations
to merge local and technological paradigms’ in IKTC 2011: pp. 72-78.
·Kensing, F. and Blomberg, J., 1998. ‘Participatory design: Issues and concerns’ in Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, 7 (3-4): pp. 167-185.
·Leeds-Hurwitz, W., 2009. ‘Social construction of reality’ in Encyclopedia of communication theory, 2: pp. 891-894.
·Martínez, C., 2011. ‘Digital ayoyote rattle: The design of a portable Low-Cost digital media system for a mediated
XicanIndio resolana’ in IKTC 2011, Windhoek.
·Puri, S. K., Byrne, E., Nhampossa, J. L., and Quraishi, Z. B., 2004. ‘Contextuality of participation in IS design: A
developing country perspective’ in Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Participatory Design:
Artful Integration: Interweaving Media, Materials and Practices, vol. 1, PDC 04, New York, NY, USA.
ACM, pp. 42-52.
·Smith, A.,Reitsma, L., van den Hoven, E., Kotze, P., and Coetzee, L., 2011. ‘Towards preserving indigenous oral
stories using tangible objects’ in Culture and Computing (Culture Computing), 2011 Second
International Conference on, pp. 86-91.
·Rodil, K. and Rehm, M., 2015. ‘A decade later: Looking at the past while sketching the future of ICH through
the tripartite digitisation model’ in International Journal of Intangible Heritage, vol. 10, National Folk
Museum of Korea, pp. 48-60.
·Rodil, K., W
 inschiers-Theophilus, H., and Jensen, K. L., 2012. ‘Enhancing cross-cultural participation through
creative visual exploration’ in Proceedings of the 12th Participatory Design Conference: Research
Papers, vol. 1, PDC '12, New York, NY, USA. ACM, pp. 81-90.
·Rodil, K., Winschiers-Theophilus, H., Jensen, K. L., and Rehm, M., 2012. ‘Homestead creator: A tool for indigenous
designers’ in Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Making
Sense Through Design, NordiCHI '12, New York, NY, USA. ACM, pp. 627-630.
·Rodil, K., Winschiers-Theophilus, H., Kapuire, G. K., Stanley, C., and Kuria, S. C., 2014. ‘Participatory
exploration of digitalizing cultural content: Getting married. are we ready?’ in Proceedings of the
13th Participatory Design Conference: Short Papers, Industry Cases, Workshop Descriptions,
Doctoral Consortium Papers, and Keynote Abstracts, vol. 2, PDC '14, New York, NY, USA. ACM, pp.
93-97.

Vol.12 2017 International Journal of Intangible Heritage 197

Digitisation systems

·Rodil, K., 2015. ‘Reflections on visualization in Cross-Cultural design’ in Bidwell, N. and WinschiersTheophilus, H. (eds), At the intersections of traditional and indigenous knowledges and technology

design, Informing Science Press, pp. 319-341.
·Sabiescu, A. G., David, S., van Zyl, I., and Cantoni, L., 2014. ‘Emerging spaces in community-based
participatory design: reflections from two case studies’ in Proceedings of the 13th Participatory

Design Conference: Research Papers, vol. 1, ACM, pp. 1-10.
·Spinuzzi, C., 2005. ‘The methodology of participatory design’ in Technical Communication, 52 (2): pp.163-174.
·UNESCO. The UNESCO Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage. Available from:
http://www.unesco.org/culture/ich/en/convention/ [Accessed 29 December 2016].
·Verran, H., Christie, M., Anbins-King, B., Van Weeren, T., and Yunupingu, W., 2007. ‘Designing digital
knowledge management tools with aboriginal Australians’ in Digital Creativity, 18 (3): pp. 129-142.
·Winschiers-Goagoses, N., Winschiers-Theophilus, H., Rodil, K., Koch Kapuire, G., and Jensen, K., 2012.
‘Design democratization with communities’ in International Journal of Sociotechnology and

Knowledge Development, 4 (4): pp. 32-43.
·Winschiers-Theophilus, H., Fendler, J., Stanley, C., Joubert, D., Zimmermann, I., and Mukumbira, S., 2008. ‘A
bush encroachment decision support system's metamorphosis’ in Proceedings of the 20th

Australasian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction: Designing for Habitus and Habitat, OZCHI
'08, New York, NY, USA. ACM, pp. 287-290.
·Winschiers-Theophilus, H., Chivuno-Kuria, S., Kapuire, G. K., Bidwell, N. J., and Blake, E., 2010. ‘Being
participated: a community approach’ in Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design

Conference, PDC '10, New York, NY, USA. ACM, pp. 1-10.
·Zaman, T., Winschiers-Theophilus, H., Yeo, A. W., Ting, L. C., and Jengan, G., 2015. ‘Reviving an indigenous
rainforest sign language: Digital oroo' adventure game’ in Proceedings of the Seventh International

Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development, ICTD '15, New York,
USA. ACM.

198

