Journal of Multidisciplinary Engineering Science and Technology (JMEST)
ISSN: 2458-9403
Vol. 3 Issue 10, October - 2016

A Point-Of-Interest Directory For Mobile
Tourists In Abuja, Nigeria
Afolalu C. A.
Department of Computer Science
Afe Babalola University, Ado-Ekiti
Ekiti State, Nigeria
catherinea@abuad.edu.ng

OIatunji K.A.
Department of Computer Sci.
Afe Babalola University Ado
Ekiti State, Nigeria
odekunlekenny@yahoo.com

Abstract-Tourism is one of the largest industries
in the world because majority of the public have to
travel at one point in their lives whether for
pleasure,
vacation,
business
or
official
assignments. This holiday experience has
therefore turn into tourism business thereby
creating room for unlimited resources in the
tourism sector. This experience has taken further
and developed every single day to help tourist fit
into a comfortable life outside their respective
homes. Unfortunately, with the increasing growth
of wireless technology and mobile devices in this
era has brought about significant changes to
people’s lives there are still some issues
regarding tourism sector that has not changed
over the years as most tourists still rely on the
traditional tourist maps and guidebooks for
direction and place-of- interest. With the advent of
Mobile wireless technologies, A Mobile tourism
guide will represents a relatively new trend in the
field of tourism and involves the use of mobile
devices as electronic tourist guides. Therefore,
this paper proposed a prototype of mobile tourist
directory for Abuja city in Nigeria to improve the
travel experience of tourists. The mobile tourist
directory provides a user-friendly interface for end
users for easy access and understanding which
will successfully overcome the drawbacks of the
existing system as the mode operation of the
proposed system is both online and off-line
modes.
Keywords—Tourist, mobile directory, mobile
devices, Abuja city,
I. INTRODUCTION
Mobile based tourist directory is an application that
involves using a mobile device as electronic tourist
guide. It allows the tourist to search information about
a Point of Interest (POI) from a mobile device[2]. The
advancement and constant evolution of technology
has brought about significant changes in how humans
react to their immediate environments as a result of
developments and findings in the science to make life
easier and better for the present generation and the
next. The development of Internet has generated
strong impacts in many areas of life. The Internet has
changed the way we do business, the way we
communicate and also, it has given an international

Nwagbo C.C.
Department of computer Sci.
Afe Babalola University Ado
Ekiti State, Nigeria

dimension to the world. Internet has become the
universal source of information for millions of people,
at home, school, and work. The Internet with its
multiple communication channels also changes the
world of business, the marketing principles and
generates a new way of commerce. Nowadays,
people rely on the web for their everyday life,
requesting information to be available anywhere,
anytime and accessible from all the devices [3]. The
next phase of development of the Internet appears to
be focused on mobile devices where the challenge is
to make information accessible to them in forms that
the users can exploit effectively [9]. Mobile technology
is a field in rapid development. Especially over the
past few years, the improvements in mobile
technology have been tremendous. The increase in
performance of these devices, as well as the
additional hardware in form of GPS, sensors, etc.,
make them powerful devices which can develop
comprehensive services to aid people in various
scenarios. Mobile phones have brought about the
commencement of the next social revolution as
evident in the boom of social networks. Today, mobile
phones are common, portable, convenient and
affordable electronic devices, some with the ability to
transit information through wireless networks
(smartphones and personal digital assistants {PDAs}
like Apple’s iPhone and iPads and iWatch, Windows
Lumia, Research In Motion’s blackberry and Android
operating mobile devices) and others with the basic
ability to receive and send information over telephone
line networks. Mobile computing can be referred to as
computing environment over physical mobility. It is the
interaction between humans and computers,
regardless of the location; that is to say the user of a
mobile computing environment will be able to access
data, information or logical objects from any device in
any network while on the move.
Mobile devices are hand-held computing devices,
with the capability of transmitting and receiving
information over a network. Examples are tablets
PCs, cellular telephones, PDAs, smartphones with
access to a network, electronic readers, just to
name a few[9]. In this technology era, mobile
devices are produced with more power and
memory, touch-screen ability, and a large displays
with multicolour, enough to rival other complex but

www.jmest.org
JMESTN42351797

5642

Journal of Multidisciplinary Engineering Science and Technology (JMEST)
ISSN: 2458-9403
Vol. 3 Issue 10, October - 2016

computing device. These major improvements in
technology and characteristics make mobile device
plausible to solve problems and can replace the
graphical user interface of some existing systems.
Almost every person owns a mobile device using it
not only to communicate but also, to access their
favourite Web sites and content whenever they
want, regardless of their physical location or
computer access.As the use of information
technology becomes more entrenched, tourists, in
turn, have become more sophisticated, requiring
timely, higher quality information and services to
satisfy their needs. Tourism-related organizations
have responded by introducing new systems,
products and services. A key development in the
tourism sector is the increasing popularity of mobile
or handheld devices including personal digital
assistants (PDAs) and smartphones that combine
the power of computing and communication into a
single device. Innovative mobile services have a
huge potential for tourism-related organizations in
terms of both increased market share, and the
perceived quality (in terms of reliability, accuracy
and timeliness) of information and services by
tourists[4]. Such services are fast emerging and
examples include maps, personal navigation
systems and location-based mobile guides. People
travel for many purposes: on business, for
recreation, education, and entertainment, to meet
business partners, friends and family. They often
strive to combine several purposes while travelling.
Not so many years ago, travelling required serious
preparation: booking with the help of travel agents,
buying guidebooks and maps, collecting brochures,
catalogues and leaflets. Today, new technologies
allow more flexible access to information, booking
services, and other tourist support. Therefore, this
study proposes a mobile application that provides
tourist guidance services through mobile devices to
the final users. This application’s goal is to provide
a better user experience by taking advantage of
newest technologies. The main function of this
application is to provide tourists and travellers an
information directory that will be useful whether
they are online or offline.
A. Understanding Tourism
Tourism comprises the activities of persons
travelling to and staying in places outside their
usual environment for not more than one
consecutive year for leisure, business and other
purposes. (United Nations World Tourism
Organization,
2008).The
World
Tourism
Organization defines tourism more generally, in

terms which go "beyond the common perception of
tourism as being limited to holiday activity only.
An expanded definition given [7] refers to “tourism
as a travel and temporary stay involving at least
one night away from the region of a person’s usual
home that is undertaken with the major expectation
of satisfying leisure needs that are perceived as
being at places outside of, and qualitatively
different to, the home region.”
Tourism is a social, cultural and economic
phenomenon which entails the movement of
people to countries or places outside their usual
environment for personal or business/professional
purposes. Tourism may be international, or within
the traveler's country.
B. Tourism in Nigeria
History is instructive in a study of tourism, not
simply because there maybe lessons to learn,
but rather because the seeds of future growth
are to be found in the past. Tourism is said to
be as old as humanity. Writers on the subject
have always traced the beginning of tourism to
when life started on earth [17]. The history of
tourism in Nigeria is traced to the beginning of
life and ancient civilization. According to [14],
History tells us that our fore-fathers offered
hospitality and tourism services to strangers
willingly. They were in the habit of being their
brothers keepers Our fore fathers practiced
hospitality even before the arrival of the ‘white
man’. However, it was the colonialists that
commercialized hospitality as trade and
commerce”. Also, [11] noted that tourism
development in Nigeria started in 1962.
According to him, tourism in Nigeria started
with the formation of a body called Nigerian
Tourist Association (NTA) in 1962. The body
had the recognition of the International Union
of Official Travel Organization (IUOTO), now
known as World Tourism Organization (WTO).
Because of the pressure from NTA,
Government in 1971 engaged the African
Development Bank (ADB) to conduct feasibility
study to ascertain the tourism potential of Nigeria.
At the end of the exercise ADB report indicated
that Nigeria has huge tourism potential that can
fuel its economic development. Acting on the
recommendation of the study, the Federal
Government of Nigeria promulgated Decree No. 54
of 1976. The Decree established the Nigeria
Tourism Board (NTB) in 1976 to replace the
erstwhile Nigerian Tourist Association. In 1989 a

www.jmest.org
JMESTN42351797

5643

Journal of Multidisciplinary Engineering Science and Technology (JMEST)
ISSN: 2458-9403
Vol. 3 Issue 10, October - 2016

national conference on tourism was held in
Maiduguri. The objective of the conference was to
appraise the state of tourism development in
Nigeria vise a verse the performance of NTB. The
recommendation from the conference led to the
establishment of a department of tourism in the
Ministry of Trade. In 1992, Decree No. 54 of 1976
was replaced by Decree 81 of 1992. The Decree
replaced the erstwhile NTB and in turn established
the Nigeria Tourism Development Corporation
(NTDC).It has since then became the apex tourism
agency of the Federal Government of Nigeria
charged with the overall responsibility of promoting,
marketing and coordinating tourism activities in
Nigeria.
C. Mobile Applications
A mobile application is a software application
developed specifically for use on small, wireless
computing device such as smartphones or tablets
rather than desktops or laptops. Types of mobile

application include: Native app, Mobile Web app
and Hybrid app.[12]

Figure1: Landscape of Mobile Internet

Mobile Native app Versus Mobile web-based apps

Table1: Comparison between mobile native application and mobile web application [12]
Mobile native app

Mobile web-based apps

Each mobile application development platform

Web apps are written in HTML5, CSS3,

parameters

development

has its own native programming language:

JavaScript and server-side languages or

Java (Android), Objective-C (iOS), and Visual

web application frameworks of the

C++ (Windows Mobile)

developer’s choice (e.g. PHP, Rails,
Python)

Can interface with the device’s native features,
Capabilities

Web apps can access alimited amount of the
device’snative features and information

information and hardware (camera,
microphone, contacts)

platform

updates

method of delivery

(Orientation, geolocation, media)

It is usually downloaded onto a mobile device

It can be accessed through a web browser

and installed and run as a standalone

either on mobile device or on laptop or

application.

desktop.I.e. no software is installed.

Users must manually download and

Updates are made to the web

install app updates

server without user intervention

There are stores and marketplaces

Since there is no app store for the Mobile Web,

to help users and your app
internet connectivity

it can be harder for users to and your app

internet connectivity is not always required

Without internet access the website would not
open.

II.OBJECTIVES.
The objective of this work is to design a prototype
of a mobile tourist directory can be accessed
through wireless devices such as mobile phones,
personal digital assistants (PDAs) for the Federal
Capital Territory of Nigeria (Abuja).
III. MOTIVATION

Tourists often get to a new city and find it difficult
to get information about various place of interest
(POIs). Tourist information is obtained mainly
through newspaper, magazines e.g. Lagos
handbook, radio, information from friends and
family, adverts, and other simple ways those are
available easily. But problem is that tourists are
www.jmest.org

JMESTN42351797

5644

Journal of Multidisciplinary Engineering Science and Technology (JMEST)
ISSN: 2458-9403
Vol. 3 Issue 10, October - 2016

not able to get travel information timely when they
are on the move. While today's mobile devices are
becoming more intelligent, compared with PC, it is
portable, convenient and widespread. Although
many mobiles of recent decades have travel guide
application but they have various limitations that
this application can solve.
V.SCOPE OF THE STUDY
The study focuses on a mobile application that
provides tourist guidance services through mobile
devices to the final users. This application’s goal
is to provide a better user experience by taking
advantage of newest technologies in order to
spread information about Abuja metropolis. The
information can be accessed wirelessly by the
tourist in online and off-line modes. This mobile
application should provide: easy access,
information about the desired place and
recommendations for probable places of interest.
This mobile web application provides information
about galleries, accommodations, restaurants,
and shops and also, other important landmarks
and cultural places of the city of Abuja that a
future visitor or tourist can find them interesting.
VI.THE PROPOSED SYSTEM
The proposed system is equipped with a userfriendly touch screen application that runs on
devices with android operating system this include
mobile phones and tablets such as Samsung,
infinix, htc, tecno brands. For completing the
process at back-end we use MySQL which will be
hosted online for the online mode. The offline data
is remote to the application i.e. it is coded directly
into the application. For this system, there would
be a system administrator who will have the rights
to enter information about places of interest. The
administrator can enter anytime in the system by a
secured authorization to make changes to the
content by adding or deleting or changing contact
information. When the tourist enters a new city,
such tourist will be able to view necessary
information with the help of the application on his
android device using the graphical user interface
(GUI), right from the selection of interest to when
he views desired details. He will select from the
place of interest options according to his choice,
the system will display list of different options and
information on his choice. He will have the option
of going back or searching for other places of
interest. The proposed prototype will solve the

existing problem in Abuja Metropolis faced by
tourist which include: Information about tourist
interest are usually in printed form such as flyers,
adverts in newspapers or magazines and so on
and while in transit this information can be lost. Inability to access the internet, can leave the tourist
stranded and Time wasted in trying to find POI
A. Methodology
The methodology used in this work involves the
gathering of facts about the existing system. The
purpose of this is to thoroughly analyse it in order to
identify the inefficiencies associated with the existing
system and determine the requirement analysis for
the proposed system.
The specific methods used in collecting data about
requirements in the proposed system are more than
one so as to ascertain accurate results and a
comprehensive investigation. They include interview
and direct Observation
B. System Architectural Design
The architecture of the proposed system is
presented in Figure2 below. The system
comprises of mobile forms usually referred to
as activity and embedded database. The
architecture is modular and all functionalities are
delivered using JAVA Programming language and
XML. MySQL was used for Database.
 Mobile Service
The mobile service is responsible for fetching the
required template from the database based on the
selected point of interest by the user.
 Online Update Service
The online update service can be used to update
the application anytime through a cloud based
service and the updates are automatically
reflected in the mobile application hence making it
easy to make changes to the information rendered
to the users and making it more up to date always.
 Working Memory (WM)
Working memory refers to the available RAM for
storing data used by the system and allows
buffering, it is therefore recommended for each
workstation to a valid working memory.
 Embedded Database: Specification and
Design
The embedded database is designed to hold data
for a the particular application domain, these are
the information making up the template, the
database is designed using MySQL.

www.jmest.org
JMESTN42351797

5645

Journal of Multidisciplinary Engineering Science and Technology (JMEST)
ISSN: 2458-9403
Vol. 3 Issue 10, October - 2016

C. Conceptual Diagram: The UML diagrams that
will be used to model this system are follows; Use
case diagram, sequence diagram and the activity
diagram.
Activity diagram: is used in the analysis of this
system to show diagrammatically the sequence of
activities involved in the system.
Use case diagram: shows the main actors of the
system and the roles and activities they perform in
the system.
Figure 2: Architectural System for mobile tourist
directory

Figure 4. Use case diagram of the system

Figure 3. Activity diagram of the system
Table 2. Glossary representation for the case diagram
Actors
Involved

Use case name
Start menu

Description
This is the first interface the users sees once he or
she clicks on the application icon

Select POI option

The user is supposed to select a category of
interest, either hotels, restaurants, boutiques from
the options listed.

Users

View details on selected
POI

Here, a list of the selected POI is made available.
For instance, if the user selected hotel, a list of
hotels and their contact information will be show.

Users

Back to main category

If the users wants to view other information on other
places, he or she can easily navigate back to the
main menu

Users

Update database

If new POIs are discovered or the contact
information of a POI which is stored in the database
is changed, the database will be updated.

Administrator

VII. GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE DESIGN
The mobile tourist directory is a prototype and has
not been commissioned for use by tourist
companies in Abuja, but if commissioned it will be

Users

downloaded from the app store using internet
service and installed to an android device either a
tablet or a mobile phone.Where it will be able to in
online and off-line mode, depending on the user
www.jmest.org

JMESTN42351797

5646

Journal of Multidisciplinary Engineering Science and Technology (JMEST)
ISSN: 2458-9403
Vol. 3 Issue 10, October - 2016

preference. The application can be run and
developed with the following minimum software
requirements:Android OS 2.2 and above, also
device with screen size idpi, mdpi, tvdpi, hdpi,
xhdpi, xxhdpi of the android device.

Figure 7:Transportation page screenshots

Figure 5:Mobile tourist guide icon

Figure 8: Hotels page screenshot

Figure 6: Home screen

www.jmest.org
JMESTN42351797

5647

Journal of Multidisciplinary Engineering Science and Technology (JMEST)
ISSN: 2458-9403
Vol. 3 Issue 10, October - 2016

Figure 9:Beauty parlours page
Figure11: Health services Address

Figure 10: Eateries page screenshot

www.jmest.org
JMESTN42351797

5648

Journal of Multidisciplinary Engineering Science and Technology (JMEST)
ISSN: 2458-9403
Vol. 3 Issue 10, October - 2016

Figure 12: Health services page

Figure 13: Contact page

Figure5: illustrates the mobile tourist directory icon
on the screen of the mobile device. It appears
after the application has been downloaded and
installed.
Figure 6: is the mobile tourist directory home
screen, it has nine categories. From each of these
categories, user can chose any category of their
choice. The user can chose only one option at a
time.
Figure7: illustrates the transport screenshot. This
screen shows a list of transport companies
available in Abuja alongside their contact which
include address, phone number and so on.
Figure8: illustrates the hotel screenshot. This
screen shows a list of hotel available in Abuja
alongside their contact which include address,
phone number and so on.
Figure9: illustrates the beauty salon screenshot.
This screen shows a list of beauty salonsavailable
in Abuja alongside their contact which include
address, phone number and so on.
Figure10: illustrates the restaurants screenshot.
This screen shows a list of restaurants available in
Abuja alongside their contact which include
address, phone number and so on.
Figure11
illustrates
the
health
services
screenshot. This screen shows a list of health
services available in Abuja alongside their contact
which include address, phone number and so on.
Figure 12: this is the list showing the health
services online. This screen is visible if internet
connection is available.
Figure 13 illustrates the contact details. This
screen shows available contact details on the
selected place of interest.
Figure 14: this screen shows when you want to
navigate a selected website. This screen is visible
to selected from available browsers on your
mobile device, to navigate to the website of the
selected place of interest.
VIII. CONCLUSION
The project “mobile tourist directory” is a mobile
based application. It is designed to meet the need
of tourists to Abuja either on vacation, business,
or studies. It is developed in java using eclipse
and Php MyAdmin/MySql for the database. The
system is easy to understand and useful. The
software has a user-friendly screen and interface
that enables user to make use of without any
difficult. Provisions have been put in place to
update the software. Hence, This application
software will work efficiently and effectively.

Figure 14: Navigation to website
www.jmest.org
JMESTN42351797

5649

Journal of Multidisciplinary Engineering Science and Technology (JMEST)
ISSN: 2458-9403
Vol. 3 Issue 10, October - 2016

IX. REFERENCES
[1] Bhatia A.K. (2006). “The Business of
Tourism:
Concepts
and
Strategies”
https://www.google.com.ng/search?q=the+busines
s+of+tourism:+concepts+and+strategies+byy+a.k.+
bhatia&biw=1150&bih=655&noj=1&source=lnms&t
bm=bks&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjVr3zir3LAhWLAxoKHWbICNcQ_AUIDSgB
date
visited 17/02/16

[10] Karatzas G. (2010): “Mobile Web Tourism
Application”
Available
http://www.gkaratzas.com/downloads/Georgios_Ka
ratzas-MscThesis.pdf date visited 12/4/2016.
[11] Kenteris M, Gavalas D., Economou D.
(2009).“An innovative mobile electronic tourist
guide application”.
[12] Lickorism J.L. (1997). “An Introduction to
Tourism” date visited 03/03/16

[2] Bjørneseth F.B.(2005):“Mobile Tourist Guide”
date
visited
06/03/16
https://personal.cis.strath.ac.uk/mark.dunlop/misc/c
it/projects/library/05/Froy.pdf

[13]
Mia Klaus (2016) “advantages and
disadvantages
of
java
application
development”.http://www.selfgrowth.com/articles/a
dvantages-and-disadvantages-of-java-applicationdevelopment date accessed 14/06/2016.

[3] Choo W.O. and Shahryar S. (2013).“Mini
literature analysis on information technology
definition”.Information
and
knowledge
management. ISSN 2224-896X (online) Vol. 3, No
2, 2013.

[14] Mudge J.T. (2012). “Native App vs. Mobile
Web App: A Quick Comparison”. Available
http://sixrevisions.com/mobile/nativeappvsmobilew
ebappcomparison/ date visited 9/4/2016

[4]
DadapeJinendra R.,JadhavBhagyashri R.,
GaidhaniPranav Y.
andVyavahareSeema U.
(2012). “Smart Travel Guide: Application for
Android Mobile”.1st International

[15] Ogbu S.E., Idris S.,Ijagbemi A.B. (2011).
“Information and Communication Technology
(ICT): A Veritable Tool For Tourism Development
In Nigeria”.Nigeria Computer Society (NCS): 10TH
International Conference – JULY 25-29, 2011

[5] Conference on Recent Trends in Engineering
& Technology, Mar-2012. Special Issue of
International Journal of electronics, Communication
& Soft Computing Science & Engineering, ISSN:
2277-9477
[6] Goh, D.H.,Ang, R.P., Lee, C.S., and Lee,
C.K. (2010).“Determining services for the mobile
tourist”. Journal of Computer Information Systems,
51(1), 31-40.
[7] Grün C., Werthner H., Proll B. and Schwinger
W.(2008). “Assisting Tourists on the Move -An
Evaluation of Mobile Tourist Guides”2008 7th
International Conference on Mobile Business ISSN
1935-4908.Pages 171-180.
[8] Hanjie S. (2010). “City Guide over
Android”.Available
https://www.sintef.no/globalassests/project/ubicom
pforall/student-projects/project-report---hanje-shu--city-guide-over-android.pdfdate visited 12/4/2016

[16] Samra M. (2011). “The role and benefits of
mobile
Phone
apps
in
today’s
world”.http://www.newbusiness.co.uk/articles/itadvi
ce/theroleandbenefitsmobilephoneappstodaysworl
dAvailable date visited 9/4/2016
[17] Smirnov A., Kashevnik A.,Ponomarev A.,
Nikolay S., (2014) “Recommendation System for
Tourist Attraction Information Service”. Proceeding
of the 14TH Conference of FRUCT AssociationISSN 2305-7254
[18]
Vidyullata S. J., Dr. Shivaji D. M.
(2011).“Information technology in Tourism”.
(IJCSIT) International Journal of Computer Science
and Information Technologies, Vol. 2 (6) , 2822282.

[9] Jayapalan N. (2001) “introduction to tourism”
available
at
date
visited
06/03/16https://books.google.com.ng/books?id=HF
WjoeVCLk0C&pg=PA41&lpg=PA41&dq=tourism+it
s+components+and+elements&source=bl&ots=hxn
DLxa3AI&sig=GrnsqeEyyux5Jh0in1TMo9nlN04&hl
=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjNkdHH7JvLAhWkK5oK
HT4aDVoQ6AEIMzAC#v=onepage&q=tourism%20
its%20components%20and%20elements&f=false
www.jmest.org
JMESTN42351797

5650

