13 A Survey of Map-based Mobile Guides
Jörg BAUS¹, Keith CHEVERST², Christian KRAY²
1Department
2

of Computer Science, Saarland University
Computing Department, Lancaster University

Abstract. In this chapter, we present an overview of mobile guides that rely
on maps or map-like representations in providing their services. We discuss
technical issues as well as problems related to human factors that mobile
guides have to cope with in order to assist their respective users. The main
part of the chapters describes a number of relevant systems in the field of
mobile guides, ranging from influential work such as Cyberguide to systems that offer unique services such as TellMaris. The comparison is based
on the issues we identified initially. We conclude with an outlook on future
directions such as collaborative usage, new means of interaction and further
personalisation of mobile services.

13.1 Introduction
Mobile guides and navigational assistants have come a long way since the first research prototypes (e.g. (Abowd et. al. 1996)). For the time being, there are not
only many different research projects working on the topic (some of which we
will present in this chapter), but also several commercial services available to mobile phone users and car drivers (e.g. (Garmin 2003)). Recent developments such
as the emergence of ubiquitous computing (Weiser 1991) and the evolution of
portable computing devices (such as Portable Digital Assistant (PDAs) and laptop
computers), wireless communication (such as wireless LAN or the General Packet
Radio Service (GPRS)) and localisation means (such as the Global Positioning
System (GPS)) have further increased the pace of progress. The arrival of the new
generation of mobile phones that provide a higher bandwidth and allow for a more
precise localisation will most likely have a similar effect.
Therefore, there is a need for a survey of systems providing mobile guidance.
Instead of traversing the large number of available systems, we selected systems
that either offer unique features (such as resource adaptation) or have influenced
the development of later systems. All systems reviewed in this chapter share one
common point: they rely to some degree on maps to provide certain services.
Maps are used by these systems to represent, for example, the absolute and relative location of objects of interest, their features and spatial relations. For most of
the systems reviewed, maps constitute a major part of the interface, and they are
also highly relevant in human cognition (e.g. for conveying survey knowledge or
wayfinding (Golledge 1999)). Since the benefits, drawbacks and potential applica-

194

Jörg BAUS, Keith CHEVERST, Christian KRAY

tions of maps in a mobile context are discussed in depth elsewhere in this book,
we will focus on analysing the capabilities of existing mobile guides.
However, before we compare the different systems, it is important to introduce
the notion of context-awareness we will use throughout this chapter. Various definitions for this term exist, but for the purposes of this chapter we adopt the definition provided by Dey (Dey 1998):
“Any information that can be used to characterize the situation of entities (i.e.,
whether a person, place, or object) that are considered relevant to the interaction between a user and an application, including the user and the application
themselves. Context is typically the location, identity, and state of people,
groups, and computational and physical objects.”
Exploring the issues (both human factors and engineering challenges) surrounding context-aware systems was a key motivation behind many of the early mobile
guide systems including both Cyberguide (Abowd et. al. 1996) and Guide
(Cheverst et. al. 2000). As one might expect, the most important aspect of context
to be utilised by mobile guides is that of location. Obviously, such mobile guidance systems belong to a class of systems commonly referred to as location-based
services (LBS).
Mobile guidance systems provide their users with location-based services such
as navigational assistance where and when they need them most. However, this
convenience does come at a cost: A system aimed at supporting the user in situ requires some compromises compared to a stationary system, such as a traditional
desktop computer. Firstly, the technical resources (such as bandwidth, storage capacity, display size, and computational power) available in a mobile scenario are
severely restricted – a situation that is not likely to change in the short to medium
term. In addition to technical resources, the user’s cognitive resources are also
likely to be under strain in a mobile scenario, e.g. when the user is performing a
secondary task.
Furthermore, situational factors gain importance compared to a stationary
setup, where the situation is more or less static (i. e. the user sitting in front of
their computer). The affordances of the environment, for example, strongly influence the way, in which the user interacts with a device: if they are driving a fast
car, navigational instructions should differ from those given to a slow-walking pedestrian. Additionally, the user's abilities and properties can have a strong impact
not only on the way the system best interacts with the user but also on what services a user requests. For example, a deaf user has little interest in acoustic directions, and a user that is fairly familiar with an area most likely does not appreciate
elaborate explanations about known sites.
A key factor for determining the current situation is the position of the user.
Unfortunately, there is no technology that can measure the current position precisely at all times. For example, electromagnetic devices such as electronic compasses or accelerometers suffer from interference by electromagnetic fields, the
popular Global Position System (GPS) does not work properly inside buildings or
in narrow alleys (due to occlusion and reflections off the wall) and light-based

