ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY

Analyzing Visitor Perceptions of Personalization in Art Museum Interactive Technology

Gracie Loesser

A dissertation
Submitted in partial fulfillment of the
Requirements for the degree of

Master of Arts

University of Washington
2016

Committee:
Jessica J. Luke
Brock Craft
Katie Headrick-Taylor

Program authorized to offer degree:
Museology

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY

©Copyright 2016
Gracie Loesser

2

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY

3

University of Washington
Abstract
Analyzing Visitor Perceptions of Personalization in Art Museum Interactive Technology
Gracie Loesser
Chair of the Supervisory Committee:
Jessica J. Luke, Ph.D.
Museology
Although art museums are increasingly exploring the use of interactive technology to
engage visitors, very little research has explored visitor perceptions of these technologies and the
specific strategies employed through the technology to achieve increased engagement. This study
investigates visitor perceptions of personalization strategies in art museum interactive
technology, using interviews conducted with average museum visitors to understand their
perceptions of technologies that attempt to make the visitor’s experience more personal and
unique. Thirty-four visitors were interviewed in Gallery One at the Cleveland Museum of Art in
Cleveland, Ohio. Results show that personalization did matter to museum visitors in the Gallery
One space, but that despite the technology’s perceived value among visitors, most visitors did
not engage with the personalization features. These results expand the available research on
interactive technology in art museums, suggesting visitors value personalization features, and
calling for further research into the difference between valuation and use.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY

4

Table of Contents
CHAPTER 1: Introduction_____________________________________________________ 7
Rise in Art Museum Interactive Technology

7

Personalization in Art Museum Interactive Technology

8

Call for Research

9

Purpose and Research Questions

10

Implications

10

CHAPTER 2: Literature Review______________________________________________ _ 11
Technology-based Interpretation in Art Museums

11

Defining Personalization

13

What We Know about Personalization

15

Future Research into Personalization

17

CHAPTER 3: Methods _______________________________________________________ 18
Research Site

18

Data Collection Procedures

22

Description of Sample

23

Data Analysis

24

Limitations

24

CHAPTER 4: Results and Discussion____________________________________________25
In what ways are visitors using the personalization options featured in art museum
interactive technology?

25

In what ways do the personalization strategies utilized in art museum interactive
technology matter to art museum visitors, and why?

27

Reactions to personalization features

27

Personalizing experiences with art

29

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY

5

How and why personalization matters

31

How personalization influences interactions with artwork

32

How do visitors perceive of different digital personalization strategies?
Which elements of personalization matter most to visitors?

34

CHAPTER 5: Conclusions ____________________________________________________ 36
Conclusions

36

Further Research and Implications

38

REFERENCES______________________________________________________________ 40
APPENDICES_______________________________________________________________43
Appendix A: Interview Guide

43

Appendix B: Coding Rubric

44

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY

List of Figures
Figure 1: Personalization Strategy Rankings by Visitor (n=34)

34

List of Images
Image 1: Visitors walking through the Gallery One space.

19

Image 2: Visitor using the Make a Face feature of the Sculpture Lens

19

Image 3: Visitors using the Collections Wall in Gallery One

20

6

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY

7

Chapter 1
Introduction
Art museums are increasingly embracing technology as a method for engaging visitors
with their collections. The Metropolitan Museum of Art is introducing virtual-reality goggles for
viewing Jackson Pollock paintings, the Louvre is using Nintendo 3DS devices to provide
interactive elements, including rotating 3D models of artworks and guided tours that supplement
their exhaustive audio content, and the Getty is employing interactive, augmented reality,
webcam technology to allow visitors to see inside a 17th century cabinet. These are just a few of
the innovative ways art museums are using technology in their museums to encourage visitor
engagement with collections. Interactive technology is being implemented in art museums across
the world, as cultural heritage institutions search for new and exciting ways to engage their
visitors (Schiele & Koster, 2000; vom Lehn, Heath, & Hindmarsh, 2005; Templeton, 2011).
The topic of digital interactives in art museums is frequently referenced in journals,
newspapers, conference proceedings, and other published materials. The most recent edition of
the Association of Art Museum Director’s “Next Practices” series, which aims to share
innovative initiatives in the museum field, focuses on “Next Practices in Digital and
Technology” (AAMD, 2015). Containing 41 submissions from art museum directors on the
various uses of digital technology in art museums from mobile apps to in-gallery interpretation,
the publication highlights the importance art museum directors place on the increasing role of
digital technology in the museum field. The recent surge of digital technology initiatives in art
museums has also received significant media attention, with articles focusing on the rise of
digital interactives in art museums written by the Atlantic, the New York Times, and the

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY

8

Washington Street Journal among others (Stevens, 2012; Lohr, 2014; Gamerman, 2015; Meyer,
2015).
Although there has been significant media coverage on and grant funding of digital
technology initiatives, personalization in the museum field has still not fully been described.
There is a lack of publically accessible research that focuses on visitor perceptions of these
personalized technologies, and how the technology may or may not affect the visitor’s
experience with art. Initiatives such as the $83 million Bloomberg Connects aim to “support the
development of technology that transforms the visitor experience…encouraging interaction”
(Bloomberg Philanthropies, 2016). Yet, more research is necessary in order to demonstrate how
various digital strategies transform the visitor experience and encourage interaction as intended.
It has been shown that interactivity in a museum environment “promotes engagement,
understanding and recall of exhibits and their content” (Allen & Gutwill, 2004). Research has
also shown that when using interactives in art museums, visitors value certain experiences over
others. Adams and Moussouri (2002) found that museum visitors desired interactive experiences
that “enable them to engage in genuine exploration, follow their own interests and facilitate
social interaction” (p. 3).
One element of this new technology has been a focus on providing, unique personalized
experiences for every museum visitor. Using creative design, participatory strategies, and
innovative technological programming, art museums have begun integrating technology into
their galleries that allow visitors to design their own tours or websites, create their own digital
artworks, and share their favorite pieces and new creations with friends and family via social
media.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY

9

There has been some research into personalization technology in the cultural heritage
sector. Experiments in the use of personalization strategies in museums and other cultural
institutions have been conducted since the 1990s, with developments such as ILEX or Intelligent
Labelling Explorer, which was a system for generating object labels taken from material within a
defined database (O’Donnell et al, 2001; Ardissono, Kuflik, & Petrelli, 2011). The system was
designed in collaboration with the National Museums of Scotland. Some research has been
conducted on the technical usability of personalized or adaptive systems (Weibelzahl, 2005; van
Velsen, van der Geest, Klaassen, 2007; Kuflik et al, 2011). These studies have shown that users
appreciate adaptive technology, but often do not recognize the personalization strategies
implemented. As Weibelzahl (2005) highlights, personalization is good when it goes unnoticed
by the user.
However, despite over twenty years of innovation and experimentation with personalized
digital interactive technology, there is still very little publically available research that articulates
the various strategies that museums take to achieve personalization, or the ways that personalized
technology in art museums affect the visitor experience. As Ardissono, Kuflik, and Petrelli
(2011) astutely state in their article on personalization strategies in cultural heritage,
“Concerning personalization, while there is room for continuing experimentation with new ideas
and new technology, the real issue is to support realistic scenarios—real visitors and users, as
individuals and groups in daily interactions with cultural heritage.” By studying the effect these
digitally mediated experiences have on visitors’ experiences, the field can broaden their
understanding of how visitors engage with art.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 10

The purpose of this study is to understand visitor perceptions of personalization strategies
utilized in art museum interactive technology and its perceived effect on the visitor’s experience
and engagement with art. The study is guided by three research questions:
1. In what ways are visitors using the personalization options featured in museum
interactive technology?
2. In what ways do the personalization strategies utilized in art museum interactive
technology matter to art museum visitors, and why?
3. What are visitors’ perceptions of different digital personalization strategies? Which
elements of personalization matter more to visitors than others?
Results from this research add to the existing publically accessible data on the nature of
visitor engagement with art through the use of digital mediation, allowing the field to better
understand what connections visitors are making with art and how personalized digital
interactives can facilitate a variety of visitor-driven methods of collections engagement. These
results will inform not only digital interactive designers, but also interpretive and educational
specialists within art museums so that they can better understand the role that personalization
strategies found in digital technology affect the visitor’s engagement with art.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 11

Chapter 2
Literature Review
This literature review outlines the development of digital art engagement and
interpretation strategies in museums, to give the reader a sense of how museums have
approached the task of engaging audiences with their art collections, specifically exploring
technology-based interpretation in art museums. Then, the section reviews the strategies
museums have taken to create unique, personalized experiences for their visitors, discussing
what the research tells us about the use and effectiveness of personalized interactive experiences
in museums.
As a place for the public to view and appreciate art, art museums have continuously
pursued new strategies for engaging their visitors. Non-digital strategies include exhibit labels,
docent-led tours, and even the inclusion of benches from which to view artwork.
Technology-based interpretation in art museums
One recent strategy for engaging visitors with art has been through the integration of
technology. Indeed, the topic of engaging the public with the arts through the use of technology
has received substantial attention, even inspiring the creation of Bloomberg Connects, an
initiative aimed at “supporting the development of state-of-the-art technology, from mobile
applications to immersive galleries and other dynamic tools, designed to transform the visitor
experience, encouraging interaction and exploration of cultural institutions on and offsite”
(Bloomberg Philanthropies, 2016, para. 2). Through this initiative, the Solomon R. Guggenheim
Museum, the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Art Institute of Chicago, the New York Botanical
Garden, and the Museum of Modern Art received $15 million dollars to integrate mobile
technology into their institution. In general, technology is seen as indispensable to arts

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 12

organizations, as evidenced by a recent Pew Charitable Trust survey of 1,256 arts organizations,
which found that 78% of the organizations felt that technologies were “very important” for
increasing audience engagement (Pew Research Center, 2013).
This implementation of technology has occurred in various dimensions. One way in
which art museums have integrated technology into their organizations is through the
development of an online presence. The same Pew study found that 99% of organizations
surveyed had their own website, and 97% had some form of social media presence, such as an
account on YouTube or Facebook (Pew Research Center, 2013). Research demonstrates that not
only do visitors appreciate the existence of a website, but also expect online, “user-friendly”
access to arts collections (Getty Foundation, 2007; Marty, 2008). This access to collections
online has proven very valuable to visitors (Kravchyna & Hastings, 2002), and art museums are
increasingly digitizing their collections in order to provide access remotely to the general public.
Although additional research can still be conducted, a substantial collection of research has been
conducted on visitor interest in and perceptions of online collections, concluding in a general
understanding of who uses online collections databases, the frequency of usage, and user search
strategies and preferences, among others (Hughes, 2011; Wickell, 2014).
Another method of integrating technology into museums has occurred on site, with
institutions introducing computer stations, mobile apps, and other interactive elements to
encourage engagement. Much of the research that has been conducted on interactive technology
in museums has been focused on science centers and other related institutions. However, that
research tells us that technological integration in exhibits does attract visitors and holds their
attention (Sandifer, 2003). However, a 2005 study by Heath et al. explored the use of stationary
touch stations in museums, finding that these stations may limit the complexity of visitors’

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 13

collaboration and co-participation (Heath, vom Lehn, & Osborne, 2005). The study hoped to
explore how exhibits can facilitate interaction and collaboration among visitors. Researchers
analyzed approximately 500 hours of video data collected at the Wellcome Wing of the Science
Museum in London as well as the Explore@Bristol science center, which both featured “cuttingedge” interactive technology. In addition, interviews were conducted with designers, educators,
and museum managers as well as visitors. The researchers suggest that the limited nature of
visitors’ collaboration and co-participation is due in large part to the design of the interactives
themselves, which privileged individual usage.
The use of digital technology in art museums has also been explored. The American
Alliance of Museum (2012) study on mobile technology in museums stated that “art museums
have traditionally been at the forefront of mobile offerings,” and the study found that 35% of all
art museums surveyed were using new mobile technology to engage visitors. A 2003 study
examined the ways in which visitors to a contemporary art gallery used Personal Digital
Assistant devices to navigate an exhibition, focusing on the ways the visitors used the device to
examine objects, alone and with others, and how the PDA may have affected the way visitors
organized their own visit (Von Lehm & Heath, 2003). The researchers conducted field
observations and video recordings of visitors using a PDA in the galleries over a four-week
period. They found that the PDAs changed the way that visitors navigate through the museum,
significantly increasing dwell time in areas highlighted by the device.
Defining personalization
Personalization as a technological strategy has differing definitions within various
disciplines and industries. On a technological level, personalization is “a process of providing
relevant content based on an individual user preferences” (Kyung Lee, 2013, p. 25). More

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 14

generally, and more applicable for the purposes of this study, personalization strategies allow
museum visitors to have unique experiences, by leveraging technology to allow visitors to
customize their tours through the galleries, navigate through a museum’s large collection, or
design and share their own personal creations, to give a few examples. Rather than a typical
museum experience, in which a visitor is confronted with a series of interpretive devices aimed
at a large, diverse audience, a personalized museum experience is focused on the needs and
desires of the individual.
A number of art museums have begun incorporating personalization strategies into their
interpretative plans, including the Cleveland Museum of Art, the Cooper Hewitt Design
Museum, and the Dallas Museum of Art. These initiatives can vary, with the Cleveland Museum
of Art and the Cooper Hewitt Design Museum focusing on collections, and the Dallas Museum
of Art centering their initiative on membership. There has been much theory focused on the
relevance of personalization strategies in museums to visitors. Nina Simon (2010), in her muchread book “The Participatory Museum,” states that “visitors need to see how cultural institutions
are relevant and valuable to their own lives, and the easiest way to deliver that is via personalized
entry points that speak to people’s individual needs and interests” (p. 35). Additionally, John
Falk (2006) has expressed the need for personalized experiences in museums, stating that
the more tightly aligned the experience is with individuals’ own fundamental needs, the
more profoundly and intensely satisfied they will be...our research would suggest that any
movement toward customization based upon motivation and identity will help ensure that
the experiences your public has lead to a significantly enhanced perception of value (p.
103).

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 15

Overall, customization and personalization in museums has been highlighted by many prominent
museum studies theorists as an effective and necessary engagement strategy.
What we know about personalization
In terms of the research that has been conducted on personalization in museums, Colleen
Dillon (2015) has recently released data on visitor perceptions of non-digital personalization in
museums. Drawing on a research conducted at an undisclosed organization that partners with the
predictive technology company IMPACTS, Dillon looked at the effect that PFEs, or personal
facilitated experiences, have on the museum visitor. A PFE is a “one-to-one or one-to few
interaction that occurs between an onsite representative of the organization and a visitor.” Dillon
analyzed visitor perceptions of perceived value of admission when visitors had a PFE and when
visitors did not. She found that non-digital, personally facilitated experiences have an impact on
visitor levels of satisfaction, increasing visitor’s perceived value of admission, perceptions of
entertainment experience, and educational experience. Dillon also highlights research that
demonstrates that standardized experiences are in decline, with fewer and fewer visitors valuing
those experiences. From 2008 to 2014, IMPACTS presented visitors with the statement “Group
tours are a fun way to visit a museum,” and asked visitors to respond with a level of agreement
on a 1 to 100 scale. Over six years, perception has steadily declined, now under 50. Although her
study does address visitor perceptions of personalized experiences in museums, it does not
address the use of technology to achieve this aim.
An Adams & Moussouri (2002) case study focused on three institutions: Eureka! The
Museum for Children in Halifax, the Archaeological Resource Center in New York, and the
Xperiment! Gallery at the Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester. Interviews were
conducted and visitors were asked to describe their experience in interactive spaces in

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 16

comparison with their experiences in traditional museum spaces. The study found that “museum
visitors value interactive experiences that enable them to engage in genuine exploration, follow
their own interests and facilitate social interaction” (p. 3).
One evaluation study conducted at the Fine Arts Museum of San Francisco analyzed how
visitor engagement with art was altered by the use of a mobile app. The app is designed as an
immersive audio experience featuring the voices of museum curators, experts, and museum
visitors as they interpret the institution’s outdoor art and architecture (Girardeau et al., 2015).
The app is customizable, as visitors choose which perspectives they’d like to hear, and is also
participatory, as visitors are encouraged to add to the discussion with their own recordings.
Visitors who used the app were asked to fill out a survey with questions on a Likert scale
regarding art engagement. The results showed that the majority of visitors were engaged with art
while using the app, with 92% of visitors stating that they look more closely at works of art.
Some studies have highlighted the issue of museum fatigue, or information overload,
which refers to the decrease in visitor attention and interest with successive or prolonged viewing
of objects (Bitgood, 2009). As Bitgood discusses, this decrease in visitor interest may in fact
have an effect on visitor learning and engagement with art. Some researchers have suggested that
personalization strategies could potentially mitigate some of the information overload that occurs
in a traditional museum visit (Itmazi & Megias, 2008; Huang et al., 2012).
Future research into personalization
Despite the existing research on personalization technology in museums, there is still
little research that addresses visitor perceptions of these strategies and how or if they facilitate
visitor engagement with art. Many of the research studies do not focus directly on the
personalization element of interactivity, and those that do often address personalization as an

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 17

overarching strategy. There is very little research that has been conducted on the different
elements of personalization in art museums, such as curatorial control or social media
integration, and how visitors value these particular elements.
This lack of research is particularly striking, as art museums expand their use of
personalization strategies. The Cleveland Museum of Art has plans to extend their technological
integration, specifically the elements that target personalization, as they “devise digital
strategy…to examine the way we track individuals across all touch points and personalize not
just their visit, but our array of interactions with them” (Alexander, 2014, Gallery One 2.0
section, para. 3). As well, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art is currently undergoing an
extensive redesign that will incorporate on-site technologies that deliver personalized
experiences, such as geolocation games and a participatory Photography Interpretive Center.
These personalization strategies are being implemented and expanded, and yet there is very little
data that addresses what effect these strategies have on the visitor’s relationship with artwork.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 18

Chapter 3
Methods
The purpose of this study is to understand visitor perceptions of personalization strategies
utilized in art museum interactive technology and its perceived effect on the visitor’s experience
and engagement with art. The study is guided by three research questions:
1. In what ways are visitors using the personalization options featured in museum
interactive technology?
2. In what ways do the personalization strategies utilized in art museum interactive
technology matter to art museum visitors, and why?
3. What are visitors’ perceptions of different digital personalization strategies? Which
elements of personalization matter more to visitors than others?
This chapter describes the study’s methods, in particular the research site, data collection
procedures, data analysis procedures, and methodological limitations.
Research Site
First open to the public in January 2013, Gallery One is the Cleveland Museum of Art’s
interactive art gallery that incorporates cutting-edge technology to engage visitors with the
collection and facilitate the visitor experience. The gallery was named Gallery One because it
was designed to act as a starting point of the museum visitor, as they became acquainted with the
vast collection of the CMA through interactive games and multimedia activities, interspersed
with actual objects from the collections. The space consists of two rooms: the first space, located
just to the left of the main museum entrance, features six interactive, touch-screen displays
organized by various themes, such as Globalism or Sculpture. These interactives, called Lenses,
utilize various engagement strategies, including allowing visitors to create their own works of art
inspired by an Abstract Expressionist work and using gestural recognition software to map a
visitor’s facial expressions or body movements and identify an artwork within the collection that
matches their movements.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 19

Image 1: Visitors walking through the Gallery One space. Photography: Local Projects

Image 2: Visitor using the Make a Face feature of the Sculpture Lens. Photography: Local
Projects

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 20

Image 1: Visitors using the Collections Wall in Gallery One. Photography: Gracie Loesser

The second room within Gallery One at the Cleveland Museum of Art features a 40-foot,
multi-touch wall called the Collections Wall that displays, in real time, every object currently on
view at the museum. The screen rotates every 30 seconds from an all-encompassing view of the
roughly 4,500 artworks on view to a thematic grouping of artworks curated by the Cleveland
Museum of Art staff, which highlight various themes from “Love and Lust” to “Portraiture.” The
Collections Wall is designed to function alongside the CMA’s ArtLens app, downloadable on the
iPhone or iPad, which gives visitors the opportunity to create favorites collections, design
personal tours, or discover more information about artworks in the collection. The Wall also

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 21

allows visitors to “favorite” any items they enjoy, which can then be referenced later on the
downloadable app. If a visitor chooses not to use the mobile technology feature, he/she can still
favorite an object, and the tally of total “likes” is visible next to each item on the Collections
Wall.
The Cleveland Museum of Art cites some key motivations for developing the gallery and
guiding goals for implementing the space. The museum hoped that visitors might “feel
empowered to browse, explore, and create personal meanings about the museum’s
collection…enjoy an organic, visitor-driven experience in the space…[and] create a personalized
profile driven by their interests” (Alexander, Barton, & Goeser, 2013, Goals of Gallery One
section, para. 4). The literature that informed the museum’s effort to build a dedicated gallery for
digital interpretation included John Falk’s Identity and the Museum Visitor Experience (2009),
which highlighted visitors’ motivations over demographic information as a critical component to
understanding a museum audience. In addition, the Dallas Museum of Art’s 2011 research
initiative Ignite the Power of Art helped the Cleveland Museum of Art better understand how
visitors engage with art and what triggers cause engagement (Pitman & Hairy, 2011). Finally, the
museum looked at their own internal studies, mainly the 1994 publication The Visitor’s Voice,
which focused on visitor experience in the CMA’s Renaissance and Baroque galleries, and a
more recent 2009 study conducted by Marianna Adams of Audience Focus, Inc. that focused on
visitor meaning making in the reinstalled European and American art galleries. (Schloder,
Williams, & Mann, 1993; Adams, 2013). The latter study informed the museum that their
visitors were mostly interested in browsing and were “not seeming to have a predefined agenda
for their visit other than gravitating to the works of art to which they respond strongly based on

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 22

their tastes and prior knowledge” (Alexander, Barton, & Goeser, 2013, Audience Research
section, para. 4).
The Gallery One space at the Cleveland Museum of Art was chosen due to its specific
focus on personalizing the museum visit through various technological strategies, including
gestural recognition, social media integration, curatorial features, and creative production
capacities. A relatively new and highly-praised addition, Gallery One is also recognized as one
of the more innovative and cutting-edge technological galleries in current art museums.
Data Collection Procedures
With the approval of the University of Washington’s Institutional Review Board, semistructured interviews were conducted with 34 adult visitors at the Cleveland Museum of Art in
Cleveland, Ohio. Visitors were chosen using a continuous random sampling method, and all
interviews were conducted on-site at the museum in the newly implemented, technology-focused
Gallery One space. Data were collected through audio-recorded, semi-structured interviews with
adult visitors during regular museum hours on March 18th, 19th, and 20th of 2015. Interviews
were conducted with visitors as they left the Gallery One space through the exit facing the
Cleveland Museum of Art’s central atrium. Visitors were approached while exiting and asked if
they would participate in the research project by answering questions regarding their experience
within the Gallery One space. Of the visitors interviewed, 27 were return visitors, whereas 7
were first-time visitors.
The interview began with general questions regarding visitor motivation for attendance,
followed by a series of questions addressing visitor actions while engaging with the technology
(see Appendix A for the interview guide). The interview then asked visitors to reflect on the
interactive technology, asking whether the technology personalizes their experience with art,

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 23

whether this matters to them, and what influence, if any, these personalization strategies may
have on their relationship with art. Breaking the personalization strategies into four separate
categories (Curatorial Control, Gestural Recognition, Creative Production, and Social Media),
visitors were then asked to rank these categories in terms of their importance.
Description of Sample
As part of the data collected in this study, visitors were asked about their motivations for
visiting the museum. Visitors were not confined to a single answer, and a number of visitors had
multiple reasons for choosing to visit. Of the visitors interviewed, 12 responded that they
attended the museum as an outing with a family or friend. One visitor mentioned “It’s my wife’s
birthday…and we decided to come here.” Another visitor responded that they were here for “a
birthday lunch.” In addition, 11 visitors responded that they came to the Cleveland Museum of
Art to see a particular object or exhibit. Most of these visitors responded that they were there to
see the newly installed Pharaoh: King of Ancient Egypt exhibit which had opened that previous
weekend. Some visitors mentioned that they came to the museum because it was convenience,
with 5 interviewees responding that the museum was either free or close by. Finally, 2 visitors
stated that they came to the museum for fun or entertainment, with one visitor stating it was
“something fun” to do. In addition to the coded motivations, 6 visitors had responses that did not
fit into the aforementioned categories, with visitors giving a variety of reasons from “for a school
project” to “because its cold outside.”
Data Analysis
Interviews were qualitatively analyzed using the content analysis method. The researcher
identified emergent themes using a coding rubric designed based on responses received from
visitors (see Appendix B for coding rubric). The content analysis and subsequent coding rubric

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 24

were developed based on the methodology outlined in John W. Creswell’s Research Design:
Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches (2014). All interviews were coded
using this rubric.
Limitations
For this study, limitations include the absence of input from visitors who did not engage
with the interactive technology while visiting the Cleveland Museum of Art. Results gathered in
this study on are only applicable to visitors who chose to engage with that technology without
the cuing or encouragement of the researcher, and is thus not representative of visitors as a
whole. Additionally, this study collected data on what visitors perceived, rather than direct
behavioral data. Interviews are only representative of visitors’ self-reported perceptions of and
engagement with the technology, and do not represent actual use or engagement. Finally, visitor
observations and interviews were only conducted at one site. This makes the data limited in its
applicability to museums, or art museums, in general. Instead, the data should act as a foundation
for further research.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 25

Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
This chapter summarizes the study results, and is organized according to the study’s
research questions. Data were analyzed according to the coding rubric (see Appendix B).
Research Question 1: In what ways are visitors using the personalization options featured
in art museum interactive technology?
Gallery One consists of two distinct spaces. The first space is a large room with six
interactive touch screens, called Lenses, which utilize games and other multimedia to highlight
specific elements or topics related to the collection, such as the “Sculpture Lens or “Globalism
Lens.” The second space is a smaller room which contains the Collections Wall, a 40-foot multitouch screen that displays all of the works currently on view in the museum. The multi-touch
screen transitions periodically from displaying the entire visible collection to smaller, focused
groups of objects organized by themes which are curated by the museum.
In order to address this research question, visitors were asked a series of closed-ended
questions regarding their use of the technology within the Gallery One space. First, visitors were
asked if they had visited the museum previously and, if so, whether they had ever used any of the
interactive technology during a previous visit. Of the visitors interviewed, 27 had previously
visited the Cleveland Museum of Art, whereas 7 interviewees were visiting for the first time. Of
those visitors who had previously attended the museum, 16 had used at least one of the
interactives within Gallery One during a previous visit. Of those individuals who had used one of
the interactives in Gallery One on a previous visit, 14 had used the Collections Wall, and 8 had
used one of the Lenses within Gallery One.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 26

Visitors were also asked whether they “favorited” any objects during their experience,
which is a unique feature of the Collections Wall that allows visitors to choose their favorite
works by pressing a small heart icon located below each object. Visitors are able to see how
many times an object has been “favorited” by referencing the number located next to the heart
icon. The “favoriting” feature can also be used in conjunction with a downloadable app available
on the iPhone or iPad called the ArtLens app, which allows visitors to make favorites collections
and personalized tours. When visitors were asked about their use of the “favorite” feature, 13
visitors said that they had “favorited” at least one item during their visit. Visitors were also asked
if they shared any objects on social media during their experience in the gallery. In order to share
an object on social media, visitors must download the ArtLens app on their iPhone or iPad,
through which they can send high definition photographs of objects to friends or family through
Facebook or Twitter. Only one visitor responded that he/she shared an object using the
Collections Wall interactive.
Visitors were then asked whether they were aware of the ability to create a personalized
tour of the museum using the ArtLens app, downloadable on a mobile phone or available on an
iPad that can be rented through the museum for a $5.00 fee. Of those visitors, 21visitors
responded that they were not aware of the ability to create your own tour using the app, while 13
visitors responded that they were aware of the feature. Only 2 visitors reportedly made their own
personalized tour while they were in the gallery. One visitor responded that he/she planned to
create his/her own tour later in the visit, and two visitors said they would consider creating their
own tour, but were ultimately not sure if they would. Of these visitors who were not aware, 1
visitor indicated that they planned on creating their own tour later during their visit, and 3
visitors indicated that they would consider the possibility.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 27

Research Question 2: In what ways do the personalization strategies utilized in art museum
interactive technology matter to art museum visitors, and why?
In order to address this research question, visitors were asked a series of open-ended
questions regarding their perceptions of personalization strategies utilized in art museum
interactive technology.
Reactions to personalization features
Visitors were asked whether features like creating their own tour or favorites collection
appealed to them. Of those interviewed, 19 responded that these personalization features
appealed to them. Of these 23 visitors, 10 said that it appealed to them because of the capacity
for tailoring the visit to fit their interests or needs. Visitors in this category appreciated the way
that the tour creation and favorites collection features allowed them to focus on artwork they
already know or focus on styles, periods, and genres of art that they gravitate towards. One
visitor responded,
When I’m coming today, what I want to see probably changes…so today maybe
Egyptian and Impressionist stuff. Maybe another time, I want to look at American
stuff, so if there was something that said, ‘Okay today I’m interested in A, B, and
C,’ and boom, it just gave me my tour around the museum, that would be really
great.
Another visitor commented, “Just the idea that you can already know what you want to see and
pick out – so you don’t have to just sort of wander through and get an idea of what you want to
see.”
Similarly, 7 visitors responded that tour creation features appealed to them because it
allowed them to clarify or focus their visit, making the visit less confusing, time intensive, and

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 28

more streamlined. Although this category is similar to the previous one, visitors in this case
focused specifically on the overwhelming aspect of the museum’s vast collection, and the
technology’s ability to provide clarity. One visitor responded, “I understand this is a very big art
gallery and I only know so much about art, so I believe it would be better if I can set a tour
based on arts that I know and absolutely love.” Another visitor responded, “It gives you some
sense of purpose.”
Lastly, 3 visitors indicated that tour creation appealed to them because it allowed them to
be introduced to new content, whether it be additional information from experts on objects the
visitor found interesting or the introduction to objects the visitor was previously unaware of. In
one case, a visitor responded that the technology allowed them “to find art objects that I might
not be aware of that are in the museum.” Focusing on educational content, another visitor stated,
“I still think that there’s things that other art historians can bring to the painting in that
perspective in what was going on in that time period that I might not necessarily be aware of.”
Although the majority of visitors found the personal tour and favorites collection features
appealing, 13 visitors stated that the ability to create their own tours did not appeal to them. Of
the visitors interviewed, 5 found it unappealing because they preferred a non-technological
experience in the museum. One visitor stated, “I don’t really love the technology aspect of the
museum. I’d rather kind of just walk through and see actual art.” Another visitor mentioned,
“I’m not very excited about having that technology in the museum.” Many of these visitors seem
to indicate that the technology interfered with or was in opposition with their desire to explore
the wander, browse, or experience art “in person.”
Additionally, 3 visitors cited issues with technology as a reason for their lack of interest
in a tour creation feature. One visitor mentioned, “I don’t really want to have to use my phone to

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 29

do it, because I’m pretty maxed out on my memory as it is.” Another stated they might take be
interested in a tour creation feature “if I were a little more able to do that,” indicating a lack of
ability to use the technology. Another stated that the technology could be confusing, explaining
“you have to be glancing at the right part of the screen to find something that is interesting.”
Finally, 3 visitors cited their own familiarity with the museum as a reason for their lack
of interest in a tour creation feature. One visitor stated, “Probably not. Well, I’ve been to this
museum, because I grew up in Cleveland, so many times. I almost kind of know it by heart.”
Another said, “I’ve been to the museum so many times, and I studied art, that I can pretty much
do my own tour.”
Some other reasons for lack of interest in the tour creation feature was a lack of
knowledge of the feature, and the visitor preferring the perspective or guidance of others when
touring the museum, rather than relying on their own interests. Two visitors were unsure how
they felt about the tour creation feature.
Personalizing experiences with art
When visitors were asked whether the technology allowed them to personalize or
customize their experience with the art specifically, 31 visitors responded that they felt the
interactive technology did allow them to personalize their experience with art. Of the visitors
interviewed, 10 emphasized that the technology allowed them to collect works or design tours
that appealed to their own personal interests in art. Visitors seemed to appreciate the ability to
focus on one particular style, genre, or period of art that truly interested them, giving them more
time with the artwork they enjoyed. Some visitors were able to identify a personal connection
with the artwork, such as the visitor who stated that the technology allowed them to personalize
their experience because “I just went to the one of the sections, and it had Ganesh, which is from

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 30

South Asia where I from, so I felt like if I could browse and see more sections related to that, that
would be…interesting to see” Another visitor stated, “There’s a lot to see, but if you want to
look at things that appeal to you, that’s a very personal touch, instead of just kind of digging
through everything and finding what really appeals to you.”
Similarly, 7 visitors said that the interactive technology allowed them to personalize or
customize their experience with art, because it gave them the ability to structure or clarify their
visit in some way. Visitors appreciated the ability to structure their time spent with art, because
of the museum’s large collection and physical size. One visitor mentioned this specifically,
stating, “depending on how much time you set aside to come here, it can be overwhelming.”
Visitors seemed to prioritize certain items they wanted to see, with one visitor stating that they
liked being able to clarify their visit, because “you may not be able to go see [it] tomorrow.”
Of the thirty-four visitors interviewed, 6 said that the interactive technology gave them
the ability to personalize or customize their experience with art by providing them with more
information than they might otherwise have. One visitor stated that the technology allowed them
to see more of the object than they were previously able to, saying “like when you would bring
up one piece, and then it would show you parts of it that you didn’t even notice.” Another visitor
mentioned, “It gives you a stronger connection to the art and a better understanding, because
you’re reading about it and seeing it as well.”
Visitors also mentioned that the interactive technology personalized their experience with
art by giving them the opportunity to browse through the collection and be introduced to new
content. As well, some visitors mentioned the technology’s appeal to younger audiences,
engaging a new generation of museum-goers.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 31

Only 3 visitors did not feel that the interactive technology allowed them to personalize or
customize their experience, citing their preference for browsing the collection without
technology or their lack of knowledge of the technology. One visitor stated, “I don’t think it
makes a difference, because part of the charm of the museum is walking around the museum.”
Finally, 5 visitors had answers that did not fit into any discernable category.
How and why personalization matters
Visitors were asked whether the ability to personalize or customize their experience with
art mattered to them. Of the visitors interviewed, 20 responded that the ability to personalize
their experience with art mattered to them. Some visitors offered reasons why the ability
mattered to them, with 7 visitors stating that it allowed them to guide or customize their visit.
Visitors felt that the technology prevented them from missing any important information or
artworks, with one visitor responding, “I feel it’s very helpful, rather than just browsing around
and missing a few things.” Another visitor answered that it was nice to be able to have a highly
individualized experience with the art, stating, “everyone likes different things, so if you can find
your own things and customize your experience.”
Another 3 visitors responded that the ability to personalize their experience with art
mattered to them, because it was a source of entertainment, making the museum visit more fun
and exciting. One visitor stated, “It makes it more fun coming to the museum.” Another said,
“When I come here, it’s more fun to do it that way.” Some visitors highlighted the element of
play that the technology afforded and the hands-on nature of the interpretation. Finally, 7 visitors
did not give a reason for why the personalization ability mattered to them.
When asked about the ability to customize or personalize their experience with art, 14
visitors responded that the ability did not matter to them, while 6 felt that the ability to

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 32

personalize was irrelevant to their visit, and was generally unimportant to them. One visitor
stated, “I probably would have came anyway.” Another visitor said, “I don’t know if it matters,
if it’s [an] interesting little extra that you can get.”
Lastly, 3 visitors stated that the personalization feature did not matter to them, because
they preferred to browse. One visitor mentioned, “I kind of just like wandering through the
museum and looking at stuff rather than being on a predetermined course.” Other visitors cited
the technology’s redundant nature, or their personal familiarity with the museum as a reason for
their lack of interest in the personalization technology, and 4 visitors did not state a reason for
their lack of interest in the ability to personalize or customize their experience with art.
How personalization influences interactions with artwork
Visitors were asked how the interactive technology influenced the way they interacted
with artwork. Of the visitors interviewed, 12 stated that the technology deepened or increased
their knowledge and awareness of objects. Some visitors mentioned the technology’s ability to
compare objects, which they felt allowed them to learn more about the items on display. Other
visitors mentioned that the technology allows them to learn a variety of information from
different sources and senses, whereas traditional interpretation might only feature a picture or a
label. One visitor stated that “instead of just looking at a picture and having only my
interpretation, I can maybe compare it to what other people have thought of or things like that.”
Another mentioned, “I ended up seeing things – I’ve gone through this museum countless times,
and I ended up seeing things there that I didn’t remember seeing in the actual galleries.”
Another 6 visitors stated that the interactive technology allowed their experience with art
to be more focused. Visitors felt that the personalization elements gave them the ability to
narrow in on exactly what their interests were, and explore those throughout the museum, rather

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 33

than browsing without concrete direction. This was both a negative and positive influence for
different visitors. One visitor mentioned, “It has the danger of having me focus on things that
I’m already familiar with.” On the other hand, another visitor highlighted the positive elements
of a more focused visit, stating, “I need to see everything in the museum before closing time, now
I can select and I can focus on a few. I don’t have to remember what I looked at. At my age, that
gets increasingly difficult.”
Rather than focusing on themselves, 4 visitors said that the interactive technology
attracted younger audiences and helped to engage them with art. One visitor said, “I think for the
younger crowd that they’re used to that technology and stuff moving, so it helps draw them in too
and they’ll be able to find things here for them.” Another visitor reiterated this point, stating “I
think it might attract kids more, because they’re all about being able to use their phone to do
whatever they want to do with them, so I think it would attract a younger audience.”
Additionally, 6 visitors said that the interactive technology had no effect on their
experience with art, while 3 visitors felt that the technology gave them a sense of the scope of the
collection, so that “it gives you an idea what you have and everything you have available you
can see there.” Visitors also mentioned the convenience of the technology and its ability to draw
comparisons between works of art.
Research Question 3: How do visitors perceive of different digital personalization
strategies? Which elements of personalization matter most to visitors?
In order to address this final research question, visitors were given four examples of
different personalization strategies used by the Cleveland Museum of Art within their Gallery
One space designed to make visitor’s experiences feel personal and unique, including: 1)
curatorial control; 2) gestural recognition; 3) creative production; and 4) social media. These

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 34

categories were devised by the researcher during the initial design of the study, and before data
were collected. These categories were developed and articulated based on existing research and
discussion around personalization in museum technology (Valoriani, 2013; Gorgels, 2013;
Rodney, 2016). Visitors were given a short description of each strategy as referenced below, and
asked to rank these strategies on a scale of 1 to 5 in terms of the importance to their overall visit,
with 1 being “not at all important” and 5 being “very important.”

Figure 1: Personalization Strategy Rankings by Visitors (n=34)

Personalization Strategy Rankings
13

13

12
11

11
10
8
6

5

6

6

5

5

5

5

4
3

3

3
2

Curatorial Control
Not Important at All

Gestural Recognition
Less Important

Creative Production
Neutral

More Important

Social Media
Very Important

Curatorial control included the ability to create or “curate” your own artwork collections
or design your own tour. Figure 1 shows the distribution of visitors’ rankings in terms of how
important they thought this strategy was to their visit. Visitors tended to rank this strategy highly

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 35

on a scale of importance for their overall visit, with 26 visitors either indifferent or valuing
curatorial control.
Gestural Recognition is the ability for technology to recognize your body movements or
facial expressions and identify artwork that matches your body positioning. For example, a
visitor might stick out their tongue, and learn about the art historical depiction of the Aztec earth
deity Tlaltecuhtli with its tongue out. This element is featured in the Gallery One Sculpture Lens,
which features the Make a Face and Strike a Pose game. This feature was relatively unpopular
with visitors, with 26 of visitors finding the strategy to be unimportant or indifferent.
Creative Production is the ability to create your own works of art using the interactive
technology, which is featured in the Make Your Mark activity within the Painting Lens. This
interactive gives visitors three examples of Abstract Expressionist paintings, and then invites
them to create a work of their own using the touch screen. Visitors did not find this particular
feature important, with 13 visitors ranking the strategy as neutral.
Finally, Social Media is the ability to share favorite artworks or personal creations online
with friends and family. In Gallery One, visitors can share high resolution images of their
favorite objects through Twitter or Facebook by accessing the ArtLens app downloadable for
free on an iPhone or iPad. Visitors valued this feature, with 18 visitors ranking this strategy as
either More Important or Very Important to them.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 36

Chapter 5
Conclusions and Implications
With the increasing use of both interactive digital technologies and personalized
interpretation strategies in art museums, this study aimed to provide a foundation for
understanding visitor perceptions of personalization utilized in interactive digital technology. By
interviewing visitors at the Cleveland Museum of Art’s Gallery One space, the study examined
the effect that personalization and interactive technology has on both the museum visitor’s
overall experience and their own engagement with artwork.
Conclusions
Data from this study suggest that personalization matters to art museum visitors. Visitors
stated that not only did the interactive technology allow them to personalize their experience in
the museum in general, and with art in particular, but that the ability to have that personalized
experience was important to them. This expands upon Dillon’s (2015) research that highlights
visitors’ decreased interest in standardized experiences, and valuation of personal facilitated
experiences, demonstrating that visitors value these personalized elements in digital technology
as well. Although there were visitors who felt that the personalized interactive technology did
not appeal to them, many of these same visitors expressed that they knew the technology
improved the experiences of those around them. Additionally, many visitors highlighted the
technology’s ability to engage young people with art.
Of particular interest is the fact that a significant percentage of visitors stated that the tour
creation feature and personalization options in general appealed to them because it allowed them
to focus their visit. This relates to previous studies on the topic of museum fatigue, which
comment on the decreased attention and interest experienced by visitors after successive

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 37

viewings of art (Bitgood, 2009). As stated in the literature review, many scholars believe
personalization strategies help to mitigate this feeling of information overload. The data
collected in this study strengthens this argument, as many visitors commented on the
overwhelming nature of the collection, or the time commitment necessary to view art, and the
personalization features’ ability to provide much-needed structure to their visit.
Although personalization matters to art museum visitors, many of them are not using
those elements of the technology. Only a couple of visitors in this study shared objects on social
media or created their own tours using the ArtLens app. One possible reason for this was the
large data size of the iPhone app, which was too large for many visitors to download.
Additionally, the download time was approximately 5 to 10 minutes, which is a substantial time
commitment. However, even in the case of the “favoriting” feature, which did not require
visitors to download the app, less than half of visitors participated in this feature. This may be
due, in part, to the technical issues mentioned above, which echoes the results found in Heath,
von Lehm, and Osbourne’s (2005) study that highlighted the issues of collaborative usage of
technology designed for the individual.
Interestingly, although the vast majority of visitors did not use the social media or tour
creation elements of the Gallery One interactive experience, visitors found these strategies to be
important to their overall museum experience.
Further Research and Implications
As a base for further research, this study contributes to building theory around
personalization as a strategy for museums, a concept that is becoming increasingly important as
museums continue to integrate personalized technology into their exhibits and interpretation.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 38

There is great value in museums better understanding what personalization is, what visitors think
about it, and how visitors value personalization as a strategy for engagement.
Calling for further research, this study highlights the need for further research into the
discrepancy between use and value in art museum interactive technology. Although many
visitors valued social media and curatorial control, these options were more often than not
unused. Further studies might investigate the relationship between perception of value and use,
and what barriers visitors face when interacting with art museum interactive technology.
In addition, due to the limited scope of this study, further research could focus on
expanding the analysis of visitor perceptions of interactive technology and personalization
initiatives to other art museums. It would benefit the field to have a more robust collection of
data on the topic of personalization strategies in digital technology, as many of the larger art
institutions around the world are beginning to implement these kinds of initiatives.
Although this study investigated the perceived values of various personalization
strategies in art museum technology, there is still much more research that can be done on the
topic of separating various approaches to personalization. Future research could focus either
specifically on a strategy, or continue to compare different approaches to better understand
visitor perceptions and valuation of these methods.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 39

References
Adams, M. & Moussouri, T. (2002). The Interactive Experience: Linking Research and Practice.
Paper prepared for Interactive Learning in Museums of Art and Design Conference.
London: Victoria & Albert Museum.
Adams, M., et al. (2009). Cleveland Museum of Art Permanent Collection Reinstallation
Formative Evaluation Study. Unpublished 75-page report; PDF available through the
Cleveland Museum of Art.
Alexander, J. (2014). Gallery One, the First Year: Sustainability, Evaluation Process, and a New
Smart Phone App, Museums and the Web, Baltimore, MD, April 2-5, 2014.
http://mw2014.museumsandtheweb.com/paper/gallery-one-the-first-year-sustainabilityevaluation-process-and-a-new-smart-phone-app/.
Alexander, J., Barton, J., & Goeser, C. (2013, February). Transforming the Art Museum
Experience: Gallery One.
Allen, S., & Gutwill, J. (2004). Designing with multiple Interactives: Five common pitfalls.
Curator: The Museum Journal, 47(2), 199–212.
American Alliance of Museums, Museums Association, & Fusion Research and Analytics.
(2012). Mobile in Museums Study. Retrieved from https://aamus.org/docs/research/mobilemuseums2012-%28aam%29.pdf
Ardissono, L., Kuflik, T., & Petrelli, D. (2011). Personalization in cultural heritage: The road
travelled and the one ahead. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 22(1-2), 73–
99.
Association of Art Museum Directors. (2015). Next Practices in Digital and Technology. New
York: Association of Art Museum Directors.
Bitgood, S. (2009). Museum fatigue: A critical review. Visitor Studies, 12(2), 93-111.
Bloomberg Philanthropies. (2016). Enhancing the visitor experience through technology.
Retrieved from http://www.bloomberg.org/program/arts/bloomberg-connects/.
Cannell, M. (17, March 2015). Museums Turn to Technology to Boost Attendance by Millenials.
The New York Times. Retrieved from
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/19/arts/artsspecial/museums-turn-to-technology-toboost-attendance-by-millennials.html.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 40

Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches. Los Angeles: Sage
Dillon, C. (2015, May 6). Six Ways Personalization Trends are Affecting Museums and Cultural
Centers. Retrieved from http://colleendilen.com/2015/05/06/six-ways-personalizationtrends-are-affecting-museums-and-cultural-centers-data/.
Falk, J. (2009). Identity and the museum visitor experience. Walnut Creek, California: Left Coast
Press.
Falk, J. (2006). Thriving in the Knowledge Age: New Business Models for Museums and Other
Cultural Institutions. Lanham, MD: Altamira Press.
Gamerman, E. (2015, October 16). A look at the museum of the future. Washington Street
Journal. Retrieved from http://www.wsj.com/articles/a-look-at-the-museum-of-thefuture-1444940447
Getty Foundation. (2007). L.A. Art Online: Learning from the Getty’s Electronic Cataloguing
Initiative. Los Angeles, California: Schneider, A.
Girardeau, C., Beaman, A., Pressley, S., & Reinier, J. (2015, February). Voices:FAMSF: Testing
a new model of interpretive technology at the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco.
Gorgels, Peter. (2013). Make Your Own Masterpiece! In Museums and the Web 2013, N. Proctor
& R. Cherry (eds). Silver Spring, MD: Museums and the Web. Published January 28,
2013. Consulted May 31, 2016 .
Heath, C., vom Lehn, D., & Osborne, J. (2005). Interaction and interactives: Collaboration and
participation with computer-based exhibits. Public Understanding of Science, 14(1), 91–
101.
Hornecker, E & Stifter, M. (2006). Learning from Interactive Museum Installations about
Interaction Design for Public Settings. Australian Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction 2006.
Huang, Y. M., Liu, C. H., Lee, C. Y., & Huang, Y. M. (2012). Designing a Personalized Guide
Recommendation System to Mitigate Information Overload in Museum Learning.
Educational Technology & Society, 15(4), 150-166.
Hughes, L. (2011). Evaluating and Measuring the Value, Use, and Impact of Digital Collections.
London: Facet Publishing.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 41

Itmazi, J. A., & Megías, M. G. (2008). Using Recommendation Systems in Course Management
Systems to recommend Learning Objects. Int. Arab J. Inf. Technol., 5(3), 234-240.
Kelly, L. (2000). Use of Computer Interactives in Museum Exhibitions: Literature Review.
AMARC – Australian Museum Audience Research Centre.
Kravchyna, V. & Hastings, S. (2002). Informational Value of Web Sites. First Monday, 7.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5210/fm.v7i2.929.
Kuflik, T., Stock, O., Zancanaro, M., Gorfinkel, A., Jbara, S., Kats, S., ... & Kashtan, N. (2011).
A visitor's guide in an active museum: Presentations, communications, and reflection.
Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage (JOCCH), 3(3), 11.
Kyung Lee, M. (2013). Designing Personalization in Technology-Based Services (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest.
Lohr, S. (2014, November 12). The met and other museums adapt to the digital age. New York
Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/26/arts/artsspecial/the-met-andother-museums-adapt-to-the-digital-age.html
Marty, P. (2008). Museum websites and museum visitors: digital museum resources and their
use. Museum Management and Curatorship, (23)1, 81-99.
Meyer, R. (2015, January 20). Finally, the museum of the future is here. The Atlantic. Retrieved
from http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/01/how-to-build-the-museumof-the-future/384646/
National Endowment for the Arts. (2015). A Decade of Arts Engagement: Findings From the
Survey of Public Participation in the Arts, 2002–2012 (NEA Research Report #58.
Washington, D.C.
O’Donnell, M., Mellish, C., Oberlander, J., & Knott, A. (2001). ILEX: An architecture for a
dynamic hypertext generation system. Natural Language Engineering, 7(03), 225–250.
Pew Research Center. (2013). Arts Organizations and Digital Technologies. Washington, D.C.:
Thomson, K., Purcell, K., and Rainie, L.
Pitman, B., & E. Hairy. (2011). Ignite the power of art: Advancing visitor engagement in
museums. Dallas: Dallas Museum of Art Publications.
Rodney, Seph. (2016). The Evolution of the Museum Visit, from Privelege to Personalized
Experience. Hyperallergic. Retrieved from http://hyperallergic.com/267096/theevolution-of-the-museum-visit-from-privilege-to-personalized-experience/.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 42

Rosenbaum, L. (2015). The Brave New Museum Sputters Into Life. The Wall Street Journal.
Retrieved from http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-brave-new-museum-sputters-into-life1441657298.
Sandifer, C. (2003). Technology novelty and open-endedness: Two characteristics of interactive
exhibits that contribute to the holding of visitor attention in a science museum. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 40(2), 121-137.
Schiele, B., Koster, E. H., & Koster, E. H. (2000). Science centers for this century.
Schloder, J., M. Williams, & C. G. Mann. (1993). The visitor’s voice: Visitor studies in the
Renaissance-Baroque Galleries of the Cleveland Museum of Art. Cleveland: Cleveland
Museum of Art.
Simon, N. (2010). The participatory museum. Santa Cruz, California: Museum 2.0.
Stevens, H. (2012, April 19). Museums want to entertain you (and that’s not a bad thing). The
Atlantic. Retrieved from
http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2012/04/museums-want-to-entertainyou-and-thats-not-a-bad-thing/256042/
Templeton, C. A. (2011). Museum Visitor Engagement Through Resonant, Rich and Interactive
Experiences.
Valoriani, Matteo. (2013). Technological and Methodological Tools for Personalized Interactive
Applications. In CHItaly (Doctoral Consortium) (pp. 23-32).
Van Velsen, L., Van der Geest, T., & Klaassen, R. (2007, October). Testing the usability of a
personalized system: comparing the use of interviews, questionnaires and thinking-aloud.
In Professional Communication Conference, 2007. IPCC 2007. IEEE International (pp.
1-8). IEEE.
Vom Lehn, D., Heath, C., & Hindmarsh, J. (2005). Rethinking interactivity: design for
participation in museums and galleries. Work, Interaction & Technology Research
Group, King’s College London. Retrieved January, 26, 2006.
Weibelzahl, S. (2005). Problems and pitfalls in the evaluation of adaptive systems. Adaptable
and adaptive hypermedia systems, 11, 285-299.
Wickell, C. Great Expectations: Researching Usability of Online Museum Collections. Retrieved
from ProQuest Dissertations Publishing.

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 43

Appendices
Appendix A: Interview Guide
1. Have you been to this museum before?
a. IF YES, Have you ever used any of the interactive technology before? Which
ones?
2. Why did you come to the museum today?
3. Did you “favorite” or “save” any objects during your experience today?
4. Did you share any objects on social media during your experience today?
5. Are you aware of the ability to create your own tour using the ArtLens app?
a. IF YES, Have you created your own tour?
b. IF NO, do you plan on doing so today?
6. Do features like creating your own tour, website, or “favorites” collection appeal to you?
a. Why or why not?
7. Do you feel this kind of technology allows you to personalize your experience with art?
a. How so?
8. Does having the opportunity to personalize your experience with art matter to you?
9. How do you think this kind of technology influences the way you interact with artwork?
10. This museum uses different technological strategies for making their visitors’ experiences
feel personal and unique. I’m going to give you four examples of different strategies.
Please rank these in terms of importance on a scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being “not at all
important to me” and 5 being “most important to me.”
a. Curatorial Control: i.e., the ability to create your own artwork collections, or
design your own tours
1

2

3

4

5

b. Gestural Recognition: i.e., the ability for technology to recognize your body
movements or facial expressions and identify corresponding artwork
1

2

3

4

5

c. Creative Production: i.e., the ability to create your own works of art
1

2

3

4

5

d. Social Media: i.e., the ability to share your favorite objects and personal creations
online with friends and family
1

2

3

4

5

11. Is there any aspect of the technology that I haven’t mentioned that contributes to
personalizing your experience with art?
12. Do you have any plans to use or reference any of the artworks you saved after you leave
the museum today?

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 44

Appendix B: Coding Rubric
Question 2: Why did you visit the museum today?
Column
1
1

Category

Description

Specific Object/Exhibit

Motivation is described as based on
seeing a particular item or exhibit
within the museum, for example the
recently opened “Pharaoh” exhibit

Convenience

Motivation is described as based on
proximity of the museum, time
factors, free admission, or other
factors that relate to the museum’s
convenience

3

Friend/Family Outing

Motivation is described as based on a
time to spend with friends and family,
as a group social occasion

4

Entertainment

Motivation is described as based on
the museum’s fun or entertaining
qualities

2

Examples
• "Specifically to see
the Pharaoh exhibit”
 “To see Tut”
• "We were at the
Botanical Gardens and
we parked in this lot,
and we figured we’d
come in and spend the
day”
• "We had a free day
off, and it’s free”
• "We were visiting my
sister-in-law, so we
decided we wanted to
take her and go do
something”
• “Oh, I’m bringing my
great nephews for their
first visit to the
museum”
 “it’s fun, and I
haven’t been in a
while”
 “Just for a whim. Just
a “Hey, wanna go
and check out this
museum?”
Something fun.”

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 45

Question 6: Do features like creating your own tour or having your own favorites
collection, does that appeal to you? Answer: Yes
Column1

Category

1

Technology

Description
Focus is on the technology, rather than
on the content.

2

Clarifying

Interest is based on the tour or collection
feature's ability to make the museum
visit less confusing and more
streamlined

3

Personalization

Interest is based on the tour or collection
feature's ability to tailor the visit to fit
the individual's interests or needs

4

New Content

Interest is based on the ability to find
new objects or content that the visitor
was previously unaware of

Examples
• "It’s cool that
it’s, like, digital."
• "be able to see
things that I’m
interested in rather
than just
wandering"
• "I understand
this is a very big
art gallery and I
only know so
much about art, so
I believe it would
be better if I can
set a tour based on
arts that I know
and absolutely
love and go
around the place"
• "it personalizes
the visit"
• "So when I’m
coming today,
what I want to see
probably changes.
Today maybe
Egyptian and
Impressionist
stuff. Maybe
another time, I
wanna look at
American stuff."
• "the idea of
being able to find
art objects that I
might not be
aware of that are
in the museum"

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 46

Question 6: Do features like creating your own tour or having your own favorites
collection, does that appeal to you? Answer: No

Column1

Category

Description

Examples

1

Technology Issues

Visitor cites inability to use
technology as a reason why
they are not interested

• "if I were a little more able to do
that"

2

Familiarity

Visitor cites existing
knowledge of the museum and
its collections as a reason why
they do not need a digital tour
or favorites collction

• "I’ve been to this museum,
because I grew up in Cleveland, so
many times. I almost kind of know
it by heart"

3

Lack of
Knowledge

Visitor cites their unawareness
of the technology as a reason
for their lack of interest

• "I didn’t know much about it
until right now"
• "I’m not really sure what it is"

4

Prefers NonTechnological
Experience

Visitor cites the desire to
experience art without the use
of technology

• I’d rather just come here and see
it in person"

5

Prefers Perspective
of Others

Visitor cites an interest in
gaining the perspective of
other visitors or professionals,
rather than their own

• "I’d prefer someone else creating
a tour for me, because I’m not
quite sure what I would be
interested in"

Question 7: Do you feel like this kind of technology allows you to sort of personalize or
customize your experience with art? How so?

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 47

Column1

Category

Description

1

Younger Generation

Visitor describes the technology as
being better for engaging children and
younger visitors.

2

Structure/Clarification

Visitor describes the technology as
allowing them to structure or clarify
their visit.

3

Information

Visitor describes the technology as
being able to provide them with
additional information.

4

Browsing/Introduction to
New Content

Visitor describes the ability to browse
through artworks, or be introduced to
new works related to their interests.

Examples
• "I think it’s a great
opportunity to get
younger people
involved, yeah"
• "It gives us a reason
to bring children here
rather than some other
place"
• "if there’s certain art
that catches your eye,
it’s nice to be specific
and go to that location"
• "You usually have
something of a time
commitment you
wanna make in a given
day. You want to get as
much out of it as you
can on the stuff that
you want to see that
day, so I think it helps a
lot"
• "Well, I had just
talked to her about
being able to get more
information about a
piece of art that you see
at the museum, so
that’s what I’m hoping
to use"
• "Where I was looking
at, I think the porcelain,
and it was saying where
it came from and who
made it and why they
made it. I thought it
was pretty neat"
• "it had Ganesh, which
is from South Asia
where I from, so I felt
like if I could browse
and see more sections
related to that, that
would be – it would be
interesting"

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 48

5

Personal Interests

Visitor describes the ability to collect
works or design tours that appeal to
their own interests.

6

Control

Visitor describes the ability to take
charge of their own experience.

• "that if you’re
interested in some
particular theme or
some particular period
you can quickly put
together a list of the
items at the museum"
• "if you want to look at
things that appeal to
you, that’s a very
personal touch, instead
of just kind of digging
through everything and
finding what really
appeals to you"
• "I feel like any
situation where
someone is able to be
more in control of their
tourist experience, they
like that"

Question 8: Does having the opportunity to personalize your experience with art matter to
you? Answer: Yes

Column1

Category

Description

1

Guidance

Visitor describes the
personalization features as being
able to guide them through their
experience.

2

Entertainment

Visitor describes the
personalization feature as being fun
or entertaining.

Examples
• "So, yeah, I guess as far as using it
as a map in general, would be nice"
• " I feel it’s very helpful, rather than
just browsing around and missing a
few things"
• "Just because everyone likes
different things, so if you can find
your own things and customize your
experience"
• "It makes it more fun coming to the
museum"

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 49

Question 8: Does having the opportunity to personalize your experience with art matter to
you? Answer: No

Column1

Category

Description

1

Redundancy

Visitor describes the
personalization feature as being
redundant or unnecessary.

Irrelevant

Visitor describes the
personalization feature as being
unimportant to their visit, and
not a determining factor.

Prefer Browsing

Visitor describes the
personalization feature as being
too focused or predetermined,
and prefer a browsing
experience.

Familiarity

Visitor describes their existing
familiarity with the museum as a
reason for their disinterest in the
personalization features.

2

3

4

Examples
• "No, because
when I come here I
have – well, I’ve
already customized
it"
• "Um, not really,
because I probably
would have came
anyway."
• "I guess it doesn’t
like matter"
• "I kind of just like
wandering through
the museum and
looking at stuff
rather than being on
a predetermined
course."
• "Not today, we
were just kind of
browsing"
• "if I was probably
in a different – like
in a city where I
hadn’t been to the
museum, but since I
know this one so
well, it’s not as big"

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 50

Question 9: How do you think that this kind of technology influences the way you interact
with artwork?
Column1

Category

Description

Deepen or Increase Knowledge
and Awareness

Visitor describes the technology as
strengthening or deepening their
connection with art or increasing their
knowledge of the artwork.

2

Scope

Visitor describes the technology as
giving them an understanding of all the
items as a collection, or in relation to
one another.

3

No Change

Visitor describes the technology as
having no effect on their relationship
or experience with art

4

Comparison

Visitor describes the technology as
allowing them to compare between
works.

5

No Idea

Visitor doesn't have an answer, or is
unaware of how it may affect their
experience with art.

• "I don't know."
• "Not sure"

Visitor describes the technology as
allowing them to focus on their
particular interests, or limiting their
ability to learn about new topics or
objects they may have been unaware
of.

• "it has the
danger of having
me focus on
things that I’m
already familiar
with"
• "rather than
view art going
period by period
…instead just
target some
particular items
and see those"

1

6

Focuses

Examples
• "I think it will
help continue to
deepen it"
• "getting more
in depth
information
about it than just
what’s in front
of you"
• "getting to
know more
about the art that
I’m looking at"
• "it gives you
an idea what you
have and
everything you
have available
you can see
there"
• "Probably
pretty little for
me, at least"
• "I get more out
of it seeing it in
person"
• "just
comparing more
objects maybe at
the same time"

ANALYZING VISITOR PERCEPTIONS OF PERSONALIZATION IN ART MUSEUM INTERACTIVE TECHNOLOGY 51

7

Convenience

Visitor describes the technology as
being convenient and providing them
access to information more readily

• "allow for
information to
be
communicated
more readily"
• "you can
quickly put
together a list of
the items at the
museum that
you’d like to
see, and record
that and keep
that handy for
yourself"

