See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344477011

Augmented Reality to Reconstruct Sri Lankan Cultural Heritage in Prime
State: HeladivaAR
Thesis · October 2020
DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.11936.81926

CITATIONS

READS

2

457

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Defining Urban Sprawl in the Sri Lankan Context: With Special Reference to the Colombo Metropolitan Region View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Niru Raj on 05 October 2020.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Symposium on Statistical & Computational Modelling with Applications - 2016

Augmented Reality to Reconstruct
Sri Lankan Cultural Heritage in Prime State:
HeladivaAR
G.D.D.M. Galmangoda, P.Y.S. Gajanayake, K.P. Indika, N.R. Rajapaksha and Y. Jayaweera
Faculty of Computing
Sri Lanka Institute of Information Technology
Sri Lanka

of tourists visit these places and the number
increases rapidly.

Abstract— Sri Lanka is one of the few countries in
the world with a great history and cultural heritage
which has been a spotlight in the tourism industry.
These places attract many of the local as well as
foreign visitors because of their historical value.
They try to create an imaginary picture of how it
could have been all those years back which could be
a false image or a much less correct image than the
actual image. Which is why this project is unique in
the way it represents the ancient historical sites of
Sri Lanka as they were at the time where they were
in full structure. “HeladivaAR” is mobile phone
application offers personalized augmented reality
tours of archaeological sites. It uses image
processing, 3D modeling, tracker identification
using Android platform, historical books and views
from historians and augmented reality techniques to
enhance information presentation, reconstruct
ruined sites, as it was on top of the existing ruins. By
means of Augmented Reality, the real scene is
enhanced by multimedia personalized interactive
information to increase the experience of the user,
who can retrieve this information by a user-friendly
interface through their mobile phone. In education,
virtual heritage becomes a platform for learning,
motivating and understanding of certain events and
historical elements for the students and researchers.
This application provides a better understanding of
Sri Lankan cultural heritage and lets users gain
interactive knowledge on archeological facts of
ancient kingdoms.

Unfortunately, the remaining heritage in Sri
Lanka is mostly in ruins. The constructions and
other artifacts were destroyed, decayed or buried
throughout a long period of time. Even though
these places are not in their prime state the ruins
are of great value and people want to learn and
discover about these ruins about how they were in
their glorious days.
“HeladivaAR” is an application that has the
ability to show a reconstructed 3D model of these
ancient ruins as they were in their prime state. With
the use of Augmented Reality (AR) technology,
this application uses the mobile phone camera to
identify and track the remaining ruins of the place
and reconstructs the 3D model on it and displays
on the application interface.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II includes an analysis of the existing
applications which is similar to this project.
Section III includes the methodology followed by
the research team in carrying out this research.
Section IV contains the results of the application
after testing it on site. Section V contains achieved
goals, limitations discovered when testing and
future works of “HeladivaAR”.
II.

Keywords; Augmented Reality, Image Processing, 3D
modelling, Sri Lankan heritage

I.

BACKGROUND

This section presents the major work in
literature that has been published which are related
to Augmented Reality and 3D reconstruction of
archeological sites.

INTRODUCTION

A. Archeoguide: An Augmented Reality Guide
for Archaeological Sites
Archeoguide uses outdoor tracking, mobile
computing, 3D visualization, and augmented
reality techniques to enhance information
presentation, reconstruct ruined sites, and simulate
ancient life [1].

Sri Lanka is having a rich heritage with
artifacts, ancient palaces, kingdoms, statues,
pagodas etc. This heritage has been protected for
over hundreds of years with the careful
observation and preservation of various
archeologists as well as Department of Archeology
in Sri Lanka. This precious heritage is one of the
many reasons for the gain of attention to the
country from the world. An overwhelming amount

40

Symposium on Statistical & Computational Modelling with Applications - 2016

experience archeological sites as they were at the
beginning.

B. Mixing virtual and real scenes in the site of
ancient Pompeii
In this project, video-see-through HMD is used
to capture the real scene. After that, this scene was
blended by precise real-time registration and 3D
modeling of realistic complete simulation of
virtual humans and plants in a real-time
storytelling scenario based on the environment [2].

Previous researches based on augmented
reality and archaeology were developed to use in
laptops and they were not user friendly. Some of
the researches were prototypes and never built
because of the cost. “HeladivaAR” has been
developed for Android platform and even a nontechnical person can easily get used of the
application. Earlier researchers were developed
using advanced mathematical algorithms such as
Furrier and Laplace transformations. Because of
the complexity of the mathematical algorithms
most off the applications could not give the real
time preview of the scene also the output was in
low quality. In previous developments, users have
to ware separate devices such as HMDs’ (Head
Mounted Displays) to get the experience of the
scene. The initial cost of development of the
previous systems was very high because of the
external devices used to create the link between the
server and the user. In “HeladivaAR” users do not
want to wear a separate device. The user has to
only use their mobile phone. Also, the
development cost of the system is low.
Polonnaruva Royal Palace was used as a stepping
stone in order to expand this application
throughout Sri Lanka also providing additional
information has not been addressed in the similar
researches, but included and implemented in this
application. The comparison is further elaborated
in Table I.

C. Meta-Museum: A Supportive AugmentedReality Environment for Knowledge Sharing
The Meta-Museum is a newly coined concept
which seeks to enhance people's knowledge
exploration experience in museums. The MetaMuseum blends virtual reality and artificial
intelligence technologies with conventional
museums to maximize the utilization of a
museum's archives and knowledge base and to
provide an interactive, exciting and educational
experience for visitors [3].
D. The House of Olbrich — An Augmented
Reality tour through architectural history
In this research, they present an iPhone
Augmented Reality (AR) app that visualizes the
compelling history of Darmstadt's unique
Jugendstil (Art Nouveau) quarter with video-see
through Augmented Reality [4].
E. Virtual and augmented reality for cultural
computing and heritage: a case study of
virtual exploration of underwater
archaeological sites
The paper presents different issues dealing
with both the preservation of cultural heritage
using virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality
(AR) technologies in a cultural context [5].

III.

METHODOLOGY

The development of “HeladivaAR” followed
the Prototype Methodology which allowed the
research team to create portions of the solution to
demonstrate functionality and make needed
refinements before developing the final solution.
This helped in ensuring the final application was
consistent with expected outcomes.

F. A review on augmented reality for virtual
heritage system
This paper will present an overview of
augmented reality in Virtual Heritage system and
also consists of the explanation of techniques to
reconstruct the historical sites [6].

A. Planning
As the initial step, the research team conducted
a feasibility study on locations to be selected as the
most suitable place to apply the research solution.
In this study, constraints such as the scale of the
location, weather conditions, availability of the
building structures, etc. were considered. After this
study few places such as Thiwanka Pilimaya
(Polonnaruwa), Yapahuwa Kingdom, Watadagaya
(Polonnaruwa),
Royal Palace of King
Parakramabahu (Polonnaruwa). Out of these
Royal Palace of King Parakramabahu was selected
as an ideal place to conduct this research.

G. A Framework for Mixed Reality Application
Development: A Case Study on Yapahuwa
Archaeological Site
This paper presents a framework for
augmented reality and virtual reality mixed
application. The researchers have reconstructed
the Yapahuwa Kingdom and created a framework
to display it through AR and VR using gyroscope
controller, GPS controller, Google Cardboard
Visualizer, normal visualizer and custom modules
for multiplatform support. [7]

B. Analysis
After selecting the suitable place as the Royal
Palace of King Parakramabahu, the research team
carried out a thorough analysis of this place by
collecting data from various sources. The initial
step was gathering information from history books

H. Comparison
With the increase of computational speed and
advancement of specific computer technology,
virtual and augmented reality mobile applications
become feasible in multidisciplinary areas.
“HeladivaAR” application lets the users

41

Symposium on Statistical & Computational Modelling with Applications - 2016

such as Mahavamsa. With this, the research team
was able to get a brief idea of the place and the
background and history of the place. This analysis
included gathering information from travel guides
that are presented to tourists and other visitors as
well as official documents from Department of
TABLE I.

Projects
Archeoguide:
An Augmented
Reality Guide
for
Archaeological
Sites
Mixing virtual
and real scenes
in the site of
ancient Pompeii
Meta-Museum:
A Supportive
AugmentedReality
Environment
for Knowledge
Sharing
The House of
Olbrich — An
Augmented
Reality tour
through
architectural
history
Virtual and
augmented
reality for
cultural
computing and
heritage: a case
study of virtual
exploration of
underwater
archaeological
sites
A review on
augmented
reality for
virtual heritage
system
A Framework
for Mixed
Reality
Application
Development:
A Case Study
on Yapahuwa
Archaeological
Site
Heladiva :
Augmented
Reality
application to
view Sri
Lankan cultural
heritage in
prime state

Archeology of Sri Lanka. The next step was
visiting the actual place. After visiting the place
full photographic documentation was conducted.
Also, the Polonnaruwa museum was also included
in this analysis and most important information
was gathered as a result of this analysis.
C. Design
In this stage the research team prepared what
should be the basic functionalities of the
application and the interfaces were been sketched
in order to use as a reference when implementing
the actual interfaces. HeladivaAR android
application was designed to give a better user
experience
when
providing
the
given
functionalities. These interfaces include – splash
screen (Figure 1), main interface, Augmented
Reality interface (Figure 2), 3D interface (Figure
3), information interface (Figure 4), settings
interface (Figure 5) and the side button panel
(Figure 6).

COMPARISON TABLE

Smart
phone
Application

Display
Additional
Information

Interactive
3D
Models

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

V

X

V

V

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

V

X

V

V

V

V

Figure 1. Splash Screen

Figure 2. Augmented
Reality Interface’

Figure 3. Information
Interface

Figure 4. 3D Interface

Figure 5. Settings

Figure 6. Sidebar Buttons

D. Implementation
After the previous stages have been completed
all the resources to implement the system has been
set. Each requirement has been addressed and
implemented as components.

42

Symposium on Statistical & Computational Modelling with Applications - 2016

were implemented worked as expected. Below are
the screenshots of the working functionalities of
the application.

Figure 8. Main Interface

Figure 7. 3D Model (Polonnaruva Royal Palace)

The 3D model was constructed using Autodesk
Maya by referencing the physical model displayed
at the Polonnaruwa Museum as well as by
referencing history books and drone-captured
image data of the remains of the Royal Palace of
King Parkramabahu. The first version of the model
only contained basic material and very low detail.
The second version had advanced material but
lacked a few details. The third and final version of
the 3D model has advanced material and high level
of detail and an accurate representation of the
Royal Palace in the prime state.

Figure 10. 3D Interface

V.



3D view feature



Information displays feature

CONCLUSION

“HeladivaAR” application was tested on the
actual site and the main goal was achieved. The
application was run on an Android mobile phone
and once the AR interface was loaded the 3D
model constructed by the research team was
displayed with the camera footage. The
information interface displayed information about
the Royal Palace and contained a video tour of the
ruins. The 3D interface was touch gesture
compatible and we could use zoom the 3D model
with two fingers and could rotate the 3D model.

E. Testing
As the final stage of the development, the
research team visited Polonnaruwa Royal Palace
to conduct a testing procedure for the implemented
application. The functionalities that were tested are
as follows:
Augmented Reality feature

Figure 11. Information
Interface

The goal of this research was to implement an
Android application that allows users to use their
mobile phone cameras and visualize how the
ruined ancient heritage in Sri Lanka used to be in
their glory days. As the stepping stone,
Polonnaruwa Royal Palace was selected to be
digitally reconstructed. Additionally, highly
accurate information about the selected place
would be displayed in the application.

The mobile interfaces were created with the
use of Unity3D. The 3D model was integrated into
the 3D interface as proposed. The augmented
reality interface and the tracking procedure was
created with the use of Qualcomm Vuforia
architecture. The images of the existing ruins of
the Royal Palace were used as 3D image trackers
and using Vuforia it was made trackable. Then the
3D model was placed within the field of view of
the the augmented reality camera inside the
interface. All the relevant functions were written in
C# and embedded into Unity gameobjects.



Figure 9. AR Interface

In the Augmented Reality interface, the model
was slightly glitched due to the environment
disruptions such as people walking, dust and
overexposure because of sunlight. Due to these
reasons, the application could not place the 3D
model over the tracker at some points. But this was

This was majorly white box testing and the
research team thoroughly analyzed these functions
and their performance.
In the black box testing, the application was
run on an Android mobile phone and shown to the
visitors at Polonnaruwa Royal Palace. The visitors
were satisfied with the outcome because it was a
new experience for them and they commented that
they always wanted to know how these ancient
sites were before they became ruins.
IV.

RESULTS

The initial results of the application were the
interfaces as shown below. The functionalities that

Figure 12. Viewing Guide

43

Symposium on Statistical & Computational Modelling with Applications - 2016

an expected outcome and it was almost
unnoticeable. In the Royal Palace, the main
viewpoint was the front side of the ruins. The sides
and the back were heavily covered with trees but
people could go within the ruins. Therefore we
identified optimum viewing positions for the
“HeladivaAR” application to achieve the most
accurate result. Figure 12 displays the viewing
guide.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

The camera of the mobile phone is the main
component to be considered in the AR feature.
Higher the quality of the camera, higher the
accuracy of the tracking procedure.

[4]

In the 3D interface, the automatic rotation of
the 3D model was added and it could not be
stopped even when zooming. This was
inconvenient when thoroughly trying to examine
the 3D model.

[5]

There are several limitations of this software.
HeladivaAR is an android based augmented reality
application then it can’t be used other operating
systems such as Windows, IOS based operating
systems. Developed application is not the desktop
application and preferred rendered quality is based
on the mobile device. This application is optimized
for Android 3.0 or above. Below versions would
experience rendering problems when running.
This is an offline application and additionally,
databases and everything should be downloaded
and taking more data to compare other applications
which are except rich applications. To get the view
of the model every angle is not giving the correct
100% accurate output is one of the limitations of
this application. The current accuracy levels of the
HeladivaAR is as follows.

[6]

[7]

3D Model Accuracy – 65% (in relation to
historical books and existing predicted models)
Augmented Reality Accuracy – 40%
(according to tests done in sunny and low light
weather + tests done within 180 degree curve in the
front end of the ruins + tests done using Samsung
Galaxy S5, HTC One M8 and Sony Xperia Z2
cameras)
As the main objectives of the system have been
achieved, “HeladivaAR” can be improved in many
ways. Virtual Reality (VR) tour of the Royal
Palace has already been implemented and it will be
part of the main application in future. Users can
wear a VR headset and take a tour inside the 3D
constructed Royal Palace for the maximum user
experience. The AR feature will be implemented
to other ancient cultural sites in Sri Lanka. The AR
feature will be available in any viewable direction
in the future implementations to reduce the
viewing limitations of the current application.
Research on ruins will be conducted
accompanying more sources to get the best
possible 3D reconstruction.

44

View publication stats

Gleue et al, “Design and Implementation of a mobile
device for outdoor augmented reality in the archeoguide
project”, in Proc. 2001 Conf. Virtual reality, archeology,
and cultural heritage, ACM, 2001, pp.161-168.
G.Papagiannakis et al, “LIFEPLUS: Revival of life in
ancient Pompeii. In: Virtual Systems and Multimedia”,
in Proc. VSMM 2002, 2002.
Mase et al, “Meta-museum: a supportive augmentedreality environment for knowledge sharing”, in ATR
workshop on social agents: humans and machines, 1996,
pp: 107-110.
Keli et al, “The House of Olbrich-An augmented reality
tour through architectural history”, in Mixed and
Augmented Reality - Arts, Media, and Humanities
(ISMAR-AMH), 2011 IEEE International Symposium
On, 2011 © IEEE. doi: 10.1109/ISMARAMH.2011.6093651.
Haydar et al,”Virtual and augmented reality for cultural
computing and heritage: a case study of virtual
exploration of underwater archaeological sites
(preprint)”, in Virtual Reality (2011)15: 311-327, 2010
© Springer-Verlag London Limited 2010. doi:
10.1007/s10055-010-0176-4.
N.Mourkoussis et al, “Virtual and Augmented Reality
Applied to Educational and Cultural Heritage Domains.
Business information Systems”, in Proc. of Business
Applications of Virtual Reality, Workshop, United
Kingdom, 2002.
A. Jayawardena and I. Perera, "A Framework for Mixed
Reality Application Development: A Case Study on
Yapahuwa Archaeological Site", in International
Conference on Advances in ICT for Emerging Regions,
Negombo, Sri Lanka, 2016.

