Accelerat ing t he world's research.

Context-aware risk management for
architectural heritage using historic
building information modeling and
virtua...
Jong Wook Lee
Journal of Cultural Heritage

Cite this paper

Downloaded from Academia.edu 

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of t he best relat ed papers 

HBIM for Conservat ion: A New Proposal for Informat ion Modeling
Nazarena Bruno

Virt ual t ours and informat ional modeling for conservat ion of cult ural herit age sit es
Rebecca Napolit ano
Net working Hist oric Environment al St andards t o Address Modern Challenges for Sust ainable Conserv…
Oriel Prizeman

Journal of Cultural Heritage 38 (2019) 242–252

Available online at

ScienceDirect
www.sciencedirect.com

Original article

Context-aware risk management for architectural heritage using
historic building information modeling and virtual reality
Jongwook Lee a , Junki Kim b , Jaehong Ahn a , Woontack Woo a,∗
a
b

Graduate School of Culture Technology, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, South Korea
Culture Technology Research Institute, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, South Korea

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 16 July 2018
Accepted 3 December 2018
Available online 4 February 2019
Keywords:
Risk management
Architectural heritage
HBIM
Virtual reality
Context-awareness

a b s t r a c t
This research proposes a data structure for context-aware risk management for architectural heritage
using Historic Building Information Modeling (HBIM) and Virtual Reality (VR). In cultural heritage domain,
risk management plays a key role in the preservation and intervention of the heritage. For effective risk
management, it is important to share enriched data between people who monitor and diagnose heritages
and people who recognize the context of information. The 5W1H (what, when, where, who, why, and
how) model-based metadata structure for context-awareness and the framework for linking the HBIM
with VR environment which enables sharing and retrieving of risk management information are proposed
in this research. Two prototypes were created; an on-site VR application for the heritage managers and a
remote VR application for the conservators. The effectiveness of the applications was verified through an
experiment including a user survey to compare the paper-based and the VR-based methods regarding onsite VR application, and a focus-group interview regarding the remote VR application. This study enabled
to integrate risk management information scattered across a variety of sources and formats, provide
contextualized information. Thereby it shortens the time and effort spent to find and share information
by heritage managers and conservators.
© 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
In the architectural risk management field, researches on methods and tools to help conservation and management planning
decisions have been carried out by many cultural heritage organizations. Risk management can be defined as the process of identifying,
assessing and analyzing possible damage or establishing a strategy
to reduce the damage of cultural heritage [1]. However, risk management of architectural heritage is more complicated due to the
combination of structural instability and component degradation
[2]. So, new methods and tools are necessary to assess, analyze
and establish a strategy to reduce damages for risk management of
architectural heritage.
In this research, a new form of metadata and a risk management framework that use Historic Building Information Modeling
(HBIM) data in a virtual environment for risk management of architectural heritage is suggested. For this purpose, it is important to
share enriched data between the people who monitor and diagnose
heritages and people who recognize the context of information. Our
method enables efficient risk management by connecting HBIM and

∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: wwoo@kaist.ac.kr (W. Woo).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.culher.2018.12.010
1296-2074/© 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

VR, and providing contextualized information. Specifically, it consolidates risk management information scattered across a variety of
sources and formats, provides contextualized information, thereby
shortens the time and effort spent to find and share information by
people monitor and diagnose heritage.
There have been several problems in the field of risk management of architectural heritage. First, HBIM, a tool for managing
information on architectural heritage, could not utilize enriched
data. Information that can be stored and managed by HBIM has
recently become enriched with non-geometric data, but its use is
limited due to the proprietary issues with external systems [3]. Second, metadata for cultural heritage information management does
not provide information appropriate to the user’s context [4]. The
existing metadata does not reflect the context of risk management
because it is intended to archive and manage information [5]. Third,
the on-site heritage manager and the conservator who diagnoses
the risks were not able to share information efficiently.
In this study, we proposed following method to overcome the
limitations. We present the 5W1H (what, when, where, who, why,
and how) model-based metadata structure for context-awareness,
and suggest the framework for linking the HBIM with VR application which enables sharing and retrieving of the risk and historical
information. The use of metadata in this research provides contextualized information that is relevant to the context of the subject,

J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ahn, et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 38 (2019) 242–252

the user, and the interaction in the virtual environment. In particular, we defined metadata based on the 5W1H model, describing a
situation that uses sensors, service, and the user’s points of view for
generic purposes [6]. Therefore, the model can provide the basis for
context-awareness and for secure extensibility to provide further
contextualized information [7].
We developed two prototypes, an on-site VR application for heritage managers and a remote VR application for conservators, and
conducted a user survey to verify the effectiveness of the applications. Our findings can be summarized as follows. First, the VR
method proved to reduce the time to perform risk management
tasks compared to the traditional paper method. Second, the VR
method also showed that it reduces the frustration of the user compared to the traditional method. Third, the VR method had some
difficulties navigating in a virtual environment but proved to be
more effective than diagnosing risks on site.
2. Related works
2.1. HBIM for risk management
The HBIM system is a management system that integrates the
historical information of the architectural heritage and builds the
risk information into a database linked to the 3D model. Although
the data structure of HBIM is not fully suitable for browsing
risk management information and updating conditions of cultural
heritages on site [8], the HBIM system has an advantage in the
integration of heritage information such as historical documents,
monitoring data, structural data, and conservation states for use
in conserving and monitoring works [9]. So far, researchers have
tried to apply HBIM to support conservation and monitoring works
related to architectural heritage [10].
Initially, HBIM was used for archiving and visualizing geometric and non-geometric information. Several researchers have used
a parametric library of HBIM to convert architectural heritages’
point cloud and photogrammetry data of into 3D models [11–17].
Because geometric information alone lacks the diversity of information available for cultural heritage management, it has recently
included non-geometric information. Researchers have suggested
the integration of non-geometric information to utilize HBIM in
architectural heritage management; this has enabled data enrichment [18–23].
In order to take full advantage of HBIM’s rich information, it
needs to be connected to an external system, which has been difficult due to the proprietary issue of HBIM software. Several systems
have connected with BIM through GIS and semantic technology
[3,24]. Dore (2012) imported the HBIM model into GIS and converted it to CityGML [24]. And Quattrini (2017) used semantic
technology to enable HBIM data to be used in web-based browsing
systems and VR application. [3].
These existing systems contained contextual information essential to information management but did not reflect contextual
information in terms of risk management. It is because the systems
were intended for the archiving and browsing of information on
the web. However, contextual information in risk management is
critical for understanding and judging the state of a risk. In order to
retrieve and provide context information suitable for risk management in a system connected with HBIM, a specialized data structure
is needed.
2.2. Metadata for context-awareness in risk management
Metadata can be defined as structured information that makes
it easy to search, describe, use, and manage information resources
[25]. So far, many European governments and institutions have

243

defined their own metadata and accumulated monument records
accordingly. For example, The CARARE metadata schema includes
3D models in its digital resources related to architectural heritage
[4].
However, these existing metadata have three limitations. First,
the metadata of existing digital applications cannot guarantee that
these applications will have suitable features for the virtual management of 3D models and information [26]. Second, the metadata
lack descriptions of users and situations because they are mainly
designed for the documentation and management of heritage information [5]. Third, the metadata cannot reflect local features and
problems related to regional diversity and variation. Therefore, a
unified context model is necessary to define the metadata structure
for information management and for context-aware information
retrieval.
Context is defined as any information that can be used to characterize a situation of an entity. The Entity means a person, a place,
an object and an application that is relevant to the interaction [27].
Until now, various context-aware applications have emerged based
on this definition and have been categorized as one of the following: the presentation of information and services to a user, the
automatic execution of a service, or the tagging of context for later
information retrieval [28]. However, most ways of modeling context were specific to the service or give undue value to particular
information [6].
Therefore, to overcome this limitation, the metadata structure and the metadata is proposed for the risk management of
architectural heritage using a unified 5W1H model in a contextaware application design. Context-awareness, such as recognizing
the spatiotemporal background of a risk, is important in the
risk management of architectural heritage because it enables an
effective response to the given status of risks. Therefore, contextaware application in the risk management domain should include
metadata that describe various contexts to ensure the effective
presentation and retrieval of information.
The 5W1H unified model supports applications that perceive the
users’ situations in various environments by sorting complex contexts into six categories (what, when, where, who, why, and how).
The unified context has several advantages for context-awareness.
First, it provides a basic set of elements with a user-centric context.
Second, it enables the generation of various situations involving the
sensor such as GPS, the user, and the service according to the 5W1H
semantic structure. Third, it has a context hierarchy for dynamically
generating context. Finally, it is easy to utilize when developing all
application in any environment, because it has structured elements
[6,7]. These advantages of 5W1H model are beneficial for redefining and organizing information structures in systems such as VR
applications.
2.3. VR for risk management
In the construction domain, VR technologies have been used for
visualization of geographic data to support decision making and
management of maintenance data in real time [29,30]. In the architectural heritage domain, VR technology is a valid cognitive tool and
is a fundamental medium through which a user can interact with
virtual heritage and heritage information in a virtual environment
[31]. VR applications in the architectural heritage domain are meant
for preservation, documentation, research, education, reconstruction, and exploration [32]. In these applications, VR technology has
been primarily applied to intuitively share and visualize information and to provide the latest 3D model information for heritage
buildings [33–37].
In detail, the use of VR technology in the field of risk management of architectural heritage also has some advantages; first, it
allows to people to interact, intuitively share critical information

244

J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ahn, et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 38 (2019) 242–252

and schedule repair operations. Second, it enables many professionals to conduct collaborative work in a virtual environment. Few
VR applications have dealt with the use of VR and interactions for
the risk management of architectural heritage. These applications
allowed experts to view and record integrated data for decision
making on risk management [10,33,37–39].
Meanwhile, if VR is linked to HBIM system, which is an efficient
tool for risk information management, the advantages of VR can be
maximized. HBIM data have been utilized in virtual environments
since the 2010s to address issues such as heterogeneous data sharing and communication between managers and experts [33,35–37].
Because HBIM includes various types of information in conjunction
with the database which can be integrated into a VR environment,
it allows users to integrate, manage and retrieve information.
As mentioned above, when the HBIM system reflects the context through the metadata structure, it becomes easy to search
for and share contextual information in the VR application. Existing commercial VR applications have not provided user support
such as context-aware information retrieval. For example, A360
visualized virtual models in a virtual environment but did not support information management and retrieval. However, if contextual
information based on the 5W1H model can be utilized in the VR
environment, heritage managers and conservators can respond to
the risks more quickly and accurately.

define the component taxonomy of Korean wooden architectural
heritage which devoted description and semantic structuring, we
referred to architectural books, repair reports, and expert interviews. And we applied CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model (CRM)
standards and vocabularies which was designed for cultural heritage information and the metadata of a portal system of the
Korean Cultural Heritage Administration. For the ontology model,
we applied the Monument Damage Information System (MONDIS)
to represent cause-effect relation of damages. [41].
The heritage building information package is divided into building and component classes (Fig. 2). The building and component
class is defined in accordance with the 5W1H model showing basic
description and properties for risk management. The taxonomy
of building information includes the classifications of age, usage,
and architectural style. Category 1 attribute in Component information class is divided into 5 group (base group, frame group,
bracket group, Roof group, and decoration group), and Category
2 attribute is divided into 18 components according to taxonomy
of Korean wooden architectural heritage (Fig. 2). Repair property
of the building and component includes risk management information, which can be classified into manifestation of damage, risk
management type, risk management history, risk factor, risk severity, risk response, and response method. It is used to describe risk
management information and to establish a cause-effect relation
between damage and risk.

3. Methodology

3.2. Framework for VR based risk management

3.1. Metadata for contextual information retrieval in risk
management

A framework that makes the risk management process fully
available in a virtual environment is proposed in this research.
Existing risk management process is as follows. The heritage manager checks the damage to the component, takes a picture of it, and
records the component’s status on paper. Then the data recorded
by the manager is transferred to the conservator. The conservators
analyze and diagnose the damage, judge its cause, and decide on the
proper action after discussion based on the data. All processes are
recorded in reports (on paper). The proposed framework enables
this process to be performed in a virtual environment.
The proposed framework consists of a content database, an
HBIM system, a user interface including a mobile device and a Head
Mounted Display (HMD), and a server (Fig. 3). The workflow of this
framework can be described as the process of transferring information from an on-site VR application to a remote VR application. In
the on-site VR application, the mobile device’s sensor (GPS) first
recognizes the heritage manager’s location and then selects the
specific building. The application next queries the content database
through the server so that it can provide the heritage manager
with the building’s historical information. The mobile device then
uploads the checklist and the photo of the damage to the content
database.
The remote VR application downloads the previously uploaded
information from the content database. Then, the application
queries the database and provides the conservator with historical and on-site risk information, as well as the heritage managers’
comments to the conservators. With the provided information,
the conservator then diagnoses the damage in the virtual environment. He also analyses and diagnoses the risk factors and suggests
responses to repair the damage. The accumulated information can
be used to plan future repairs or applied to other situations.
Meanwhile, in the framework, the server plays the role in connecting on-site and remote VR applications with transferring the
information. The content database is created to store and deliver
information regarding on-site risk, past management, and history
for the VR applications. This database not only delivers and accumulates risk-management information; it also provides historical
information from HBIM to the VR applications. The data and media

In the cultural heritage domain, context metadata provides
information that can be used to characterize an entity such as
a person, a place, or any other relevant object in the interaction
between a user and an application [40]. In this paper, the metadata
plays an important role in context-aware information retrieval in
the Virtual environment. The metadata defines the context of data
as attributes and the metadata structure serves to structure entities for context-awareness. The metadata structure consists of PoI,
anchor and content. And they are classified using the 5W1H model.
The PoI includes information on the real space; the visualized VR
content; and the anchor, which contains the instructions for the VR
visualization. The content is classified into three layers according
to type. The geographic information layer contains information on
the space. The entity layer includes several types of information:
building, component, and so on; in this case, the anchor can retrieve
contents which is connected with PoIs. The asset layer means media
content and data files, which can include text, drawings, photos,
videos and 3D models (Fig. 1).
The linker plays an important role in providing information
necessary for decision making in risk management. First, the
linker class connects data and has relation properties representing the semantics of relationships among entities. For example, this
connects the component and multiple management data as a management history record. Second, the linker can express hierarchy
of instances by connecting instances between different layers and
classes. For example, it expresses the relationship between a frame
group and a column (Fig. 1). Third, it can also represent the semantics relationship between entities; in particular, domain knowledge
can be reflected through cause-effect relationships. For example, in
the case of column component corrosion, it can be connected to the
floor component.
For definition of the heritage Building Information content,
building and component class of Korean wooden architectural heritage is defined for representing structure of architectural heritage
and relationships among components and risks (Fig. 2). In order to

J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ahn, et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 38 (2019) 242–252

245

Fig. 1. 5W1H model-based metadata structure for risk management.

in the content database and those in the HBIM system share the
common properties of the 5W1H model’s metadata.
4. Evaluation
4.1. Prototyping
The prototype was built for the for the Gwandeokjeong building,
which is located on Jeju Island, Korea. It is the oldest wooden building in Jeju Island and is designated as a National Treasure by Korean
government. However, the building is exposed to artificial risk, such
as vibration, and natural risk from wind and humidity. Because this
building needed continuous risk management, we decided to apply
the proposed VR-based risk management method to this building.
The virtual building is modeled using 3 ds Max software. Because
Korean wooden buildings are assembled with many components,
it is difficult to know the exact shape before dismantling. So,
drawings in repair reports, CAD blueprints and photographs were
used for creating the virtual building. And then it was converted

using SketchUP software to build the HBIM data available in Revit
software (Fig. 4). Component families is created according to the
component taxonomy using Revit software. Each component has
each parameters which is defined based on 5W1H model-based
metadata of Korean wooden architectural heritage (Fig. 2). The risk
management information is inserted to each component by reference to the repair report and checklist.
Although interworking between BIM system and the external
database is essential for utilizing BIM data, most BIMs and external databases are synchronized manually [42]. To overcome these
limitations, several approaches were reported to semantically link
the HBIM system with the VR application [43–45]. Oreni (2014)
converted BIM data to ISO 10303 standard for linking a different
application such as finite element analysis (FEA) software [43].
Pauwels (2014) used semantic technology to convert BIM data into
an RDF graph, so that 3D model and related information can be visualized in virtual environment [44]. Furthermore, Quattrini (2018)
conducted semantic modeling for visualization of BIM data and
proposed the viewer to interact directly with the 3D model [45].

246

J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ahn, et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 38 (2019) 242–252

Fig. 2. Building and component class (top) and taxonomy of Korean wooden architectural heritage (bottom).

This study presents the metadata to enable to link BIM system,
database and VR application. This linkage is performed in the following steps: 1) HBIM data is converted in excel format through
DB link plug-in and 2) The data is exported to MySQL database;
3) The URL address are imported to MySQL database; 4) Related
information is exported to VR application, when user selects the
PoI in virtual environment (Fig. 4). There are two advantages in data

interaction between a BIM system and a VR application using metadata. Because most of the BIM system studies only support defining
relationships among PoIs and among contents using parameters
and families, it is far easier to define relationships between Linker
classes. This enables Linker classes to reflect domain knowledge
on risk management by connecting related PoIs and contents. Second, only the required information of BIM data can be retrieved by

J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ahn, et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 38 (2019) 242–252

247

Fig. 3. Framework of risk management using HBIM and VR.

Fig. 4. Process of linking BIM system, Database and VR application.

supporting metadata editing depending on the type of risk management. However, such benefits comes with a drawback. While
non-geometric data can be updated automatically in the VR application and the BIM system, 3D models have to be updated manually
in each system.
The content database of VR application is designed on Maria
DB which is a relational database for the storage and management
of data and related media. To apply the metadata to the relational database, Tables are divided into the PoI, anchor, linker, and
assets. The assets consist of media asset, building, component, and
management tables (Fig. 5). Every table has a unique number (id
column) and URL connected with the HBIM database for checking
additional BIM data (Fig. 5).
Each application was implemented for use with the following
processes. First, in the on-site VR application, the heritage manager who accesses to the architectural heritage can browse that
heritage’s basic information, check the potential risks of each component, and review the building’s risk management history using
the on-site VR application. The heritage manager can also refer to
multimedia content by clicking the multimedia icons. In the onsite VR application, the manager can take pictures and check off

items on the checklist at the same time. Second, in the remote VR
application, the conservator checks the condition information of
components, and the surroundings. Then, the conservator determines and records the building’s condition, its risk factors, the
severity of the damage, and the appropriate risk response. Finally,
he or she records a text or voice comment on the virtual components to describe any necessary response work, such as repairs
(Fig. 6).
4.2. User study
4.2.1. Experiment design for the on-site VR applications
For the participants, heritage managers whose careers in the
domain were more than 1-year long were recruited. A total 13
architectural heritage managers (11 male and 2 female) were in
various age groups (aged between 20 and 69), and 61.6% of them
had more than 3 years of architectural heritage management experience. They performed tasks in two methods; the paper-based
method and on-site VR method. Tasks involved checking and
recording the damaged components using the management manuals and reports, checking off items on the checklists, and taking

248

J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ahn, et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 38 (2019) 242–252

Fig. 5. Content database structure.

Fig. 6. Screenshots of Interface (top), On-site VR application (middle) and remote VR application (bottom).

J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ahn, et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 38 (2019) 242–252

249

Fig. 7. Paper-based method (left), VR-based method (right).

pictures of the damaged part. The participants used a Samsung
Galaxy Note 8 (162.5 × 74.8 × 8.6 mm) (Fig. 7).
We conducted a survey to evaluate the user experience for both
methods. At the end of each task, the participants filled out the
questionnaires about the method. For the measurement of mental
stress level and physical load, the NASA Task Load Index [46], which
is widely used, subjective, and multidimensional assessment tool
was used to rate a perceived workload. For the measurement of the
proposed system’s usability, an index of interactive 3D information
system’s usability was used [47].
4.2.2. Results of the experiment for on-site VR applications
In the comparison of the time to complete the task, the VR
method took 145 seconds fewer than the paper method. In the
paper method, the user needed to retrieve and photograph information from various sources, and the VR method seemed to take
less time because the search and the documentation could be done
using a single device. Comparing the time required to perform tasks
and the ages of the participants, the task took 143 seconds on average for those under 50 years and 92 seconds on average for those
over 50 years. This seems to be due to the differences in familiarity
with on-site VR-based interactions across age groups (Fig. 8).
The results for the users’ mental stress levels and physical load
showed that the participants experienced much less frustration
when using the VR method than when using the paper method
(Fig. 9). This seems to be because they were familiar with entering text and storing digital data because they commonly use digital
devices such as smartphones. Another item that showed a big difference from the paper method was physical demand. This seems
to be due to the fact that the paper method has the burden that
the user must deliver the document directly and find the necessary information. Because the mobile environment is widespread,
mobile immersive technology can be utilized in architectural heritage management.
In the usability questionnaire, the highest average score (3.9
points) was about information insertion (Fig. 10). We presume
that using the virtual keyboard on the mobile device is familiar.
And it means that managers had a hard time to check and leave

comments on the checklist and taking pictures with a camera.
Overall understanding recorded high average score (3.7 points)
than other indexes. This is because the application provides integrated information on risk management stored in HBIM. The lowest
average score (3.2 points) for correct answers for actions seem to
be attributed to older managers who are unfamiliar with touchscreens. This seems to be because the smartphone screen size was
too small for them.
4.2.3. Focus-group interview results for the remote VR application
The focus-group interviews for evaluation of remote VR application were conducted twice for the experts of the national cultural
heritage research Institute (four persons), the government’s cultural heritage research institute, and the Daejeon city heritage
management center (four persons), a cultural heritage management agency of the local government. Each interview lasted for
approximately one and a half hours.
Four conservators (two male in the 40 s and 50 s, and two female
in the 30 s) from the National Cultural Heritage Research Institute
were recruited. Two male interviewees have more than 10 years of
working experience in the heritage domain, and the working years
of the two female participants are varied from three to five years.
They regularly check architectural heritages every five year and
conduct Precision safety inspection. And four conservators (two
male and two female in their 30 s) with over 10 years of working experience at the Heritage Management Center in Daejeon,
Korea are recruited. They serve to diagnose the results of routine
management by non-experts.
In the focus-group interviews of the experts at the National
Cultural Heritage Research Institute, one mentioned that it is
important for risk analysts to identify external environmental
factors, and that the 360-degree image is helpful for the purpose. Another expert said that the remote VR application is useful
because experts do not need to physically visit the site. There is also
a negative response that the text size in the HMD application is too
small to read.
In the focus-group interview of experts in a Daejeon Cultural
Heritage Management Agency, most of the conservators were sat-

250

J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ahn, et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 38 (2019) 242–252

Fig. 8. Comparison of time taken to complete the tasks in paper-based method and VR-based method (seconds).

Fig. 9. Task Load Index between Paper method and VR method.

Fig. 10. Result of usability test.

251

J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ahn, et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 38 (2019) 242–252
Table 1
Result of the focus-group interviews.
ExpertNo.

Affiliation

Age
/Sex

Career(year)

Advantages of proposed
application

Disadvantages of proposed
application

Key suggestions

1

National cultural
heritage research
Institute

40–50
Male

Over 20

The usefulness of
visualizing related
components

Dizziness
The difficulty of navigation
and manipulation

2

National cultural
heritage research
Institute

40–50
Male

Over 20

3

National cultural
heritage research
Institute
National cultural
heritage research
Institute
City heritage
management
center

30–40
Female

Over 10

Accessing
difficult-to-access
components (e.g. roofs) to
verify information
Checking environmental
information

30–40
Female

Over 10

saving time and money for
diagnosis

Dizziness
The difficulty of navigation
The difficulty to accurately
assess the condition
Dizziness
The difficulty of navigation,
Insufficient resolution
Dizziness
The difficulty of navigation

It is necessary to improve
the comment input method
Since the number of
components is too large,
group-level management is
useful.
It may be useful to
visualize numerical
information on a 3D model

30–40
Female

Over 10

saving time and money for
diagnosis

Dizziness
The difficulty of navigation

4

5

6

City heritage
management
center

30–40
Female

Over 10

Remote diagnostics will
save time and money

Dizziness
The difficulty of navigation
Level of information

7

City heritage
management
center

30–40
Male

Over 10

Remote diagnostics will
save time and money

Dizziness
The difficulty of navigation

8

City heritage
management
center

30–40
Male

Over 10

Remote diagnostics will
save time and money

Dizziness
The difficulty of navigation

isfied with the historical and on-site information provided by the
VR application. However, one noted that some of the basic information is not necessarily provided because conservators typically are
experts in the heritage domain. According to two focus-group interviewees, the need for the system to remotely analyze the state of
the heritage building is verified by experts. However, they are often
uncomfortable with the devise, due to the dizziness and difficulty
of manipulation in VR using HMD (Table 1).

5. Conclusion
In this paper, the context-aware risk management method using
HBIM and VR is proposed. First, the metadata for contextualized
information retrieval in risk management is designed. This metadata provided contextual information using the 5W1H model in a
risk management context. Second, the framework for VR-based risk
management is suggested. This framework enabled HBIM information and media to be used in a context-aware VR application,
thereby integrating the scattered information sources to allow the
sharing of information in the VR environment. For the evaluation,
two VR applications with different interfaces have been developed
to provide appropriate information according to risk management
types.
In this study, thirteen on-site managers and eight conservators
participated in the experiments and the focus interviews. In the
future, it will be crucial to continue to conduct additional field
experiments so as to improve the effectiveness of the application
with increasing the number of samples. Moreover, additional test

Desktop-based VR will be
advantageous for risk
analysis.
It will be more meaningful
to update the VR content
frequently
The teleporting to a
particular location would
be better than giving
freedom
It will be useful to provide
information that is difficult
to access, such as
information on the roof
using a drone
Basic information is not
necessarily provided
because experts typically
have domain expertise
It is necessary to set
priorities of which
components should be
checked first in the
application
Environmental information
(humidity, temperature,
etc.) of the site should be
recorded and provided.

is planned for comparison with a mobile application that does not
support context-aware methods is planned. And an application is
being prepared for involving public in identifying and recording the
risk of architectural heritage as a volunteer.
The VR application in this research has some limitations in terms
of risk management. First, the application cannot recognize heritage manager’s intention beyond user’s location. Second, it does
not allow users to compare the real object in the field with the past
virtual component on a single screen. Third, it does not allow users
to operate the camera in a separate window to document heritage’s
condition.
Using an augmented reality (AR) application can be an improvement in this respect, it helps to recognize user’s intention where the
user looks at and interacts with object and information. Specifically,
it helps user localization using GPS and IMU sensors (accelerometers and gyroscopes) with computer vision technology using
cameras. And it also enables users to compare actual site and virtual objects on a single screen. Lastly, it supports users to browse
information and record heritage’s condition on a single screen. As
a remaining work, we plan to build an on-site AR application. The
application will be designed to detect components on the spot and
to offer related information and media on the overlay of them.

Acknowledgment
This research is supported by Ministry of Culture, Sports and
Tourism (MCST) and Korea Creative Content Agency (KOCCA) in the
Culture Technology (CT) Research & Development Program 2017.

252

J. Lee, J. Kim, J. Ahn, et al. / Journal of Cultural Heritage 38 (2019) 242–252

References
[1] K. Van Balen, Challenges that Preventive Conservation poses to the Cultural
Heritage documentation field, ISPRS 42 (2017).
[2] X. Romão, E. Paupério, N. Pereira, A framework for the simplified risk analysis
of cultural heritage assets, J. Cult. Herit. 20 (2016) 696–708.
[3] R. Quattrini, et al., Conservation-oriented HBIM. The bimexplorer web tool,
ISPRS 42 (2017).
[4] R. Paola, F. Niccolucci, A. D’Andrea, Built Heritage metadata schemas and the
integration of architectural datasets using CIDOC-CRM, Built Herit. Conf. (2013).
[5] Y.N. Yen, K.H. Weng, H.Y. Huang, Study on information management for the
conservation of traditional Chinese architectural heritage-3d modelling and
metadata representation, ISPRS 1 (2013) 331–336.
[6] J. Seiie, E.-J. Ko, W. Woo, Unified user-centric context: who, where, when,
what, how and why, Personalized Context Modeling Management UbiComp
Applications 149 (2005) 26–34.
[7] J. Seiie, W. Woo, Ubi-UCAM: a unified context-aware application model, International and Interdisciplinary, Conference on Modeling and Using Context
(2003).
[8] F.I. Apollonio, et al., A 3D-centered information system for the documentation
of a complex restoration intervention, J. Cult. Herit. 29 (2018) 89–99.
[9] Apollonio F.I., et al., A Reality Integrated BIM for Architectural Heritage Conservation, Handbook of Research on Emerging Technologies for Architectural and
Archaeological Heritage, IGI Global, Hershey, USA, 2017, 31-65.
[10] L. Barazzetti, et al., HBIM and augmented information: towards a wider user
community of image and range-based reconstructions, ISPRS 40.5 (2015).
[11] C. Chevrier, et al., Parametric documenting of built heritage: 3D virtual reconstruction of architectural details, Int. J. Archit. Comput. 8.2 (2010) 135–150.
[12] L. De Luca, et al., A semantic-based platform for the digital analysis of architectural heritage, Comput. Graphics 35.2 (2011) 227–241.
[13] D. Oreni, et al., Towards a methodology for 3D content models: The reconstruction of ancient vaults for maintenance and structural behaviour in the logic of
BIM management, Virtual Systems and Multimedia (VSMM) 2012, 18th Int.
Conf. IEEE (2012).
[14] S. Boeykens, Using 3D Design software, BIM and game engines for architectural
historical reconstruction, Designing Together-CAADfutures 2011 (2011).
[15] A. Baik, et al., Jeddah Historical Building Information ModelingJ̈HBIMÖld
Jeddah-Saudi Arabia, ISPRS 2 (2013) 73–78.
[16] S. Fai, et al., Building information modelling and heritage documentation, CIPA
(2011).
[17] M. Murphy, E. McGovern, S. Pavia, Historic building information modelling
(HBIM), Struct. Survey 27.4 (2009) 311–327.
[18] R. Brumana, D. Oreni, A. Raimondi, A. Georgopoulos, A. Bregianni, From survey
to HBIM for documentation, dissemination and management of built heritage,
Proc. Digit. Herit. Int. Congr. 1 (2013) 497–504.
[19] L. Fregonese, L. Taffurelli, 3D model for the documentation of cultural heritage:
the wooden domes of St. Mark’s Basilica in Venice, ISPRS 38 (2009).
[20] É. Meyer, et al., A web information system for the management and the dissemination of Cultural Heritage data, J. Cult. Herit. 8.4 (2007) 396–411.
[21] S. Boeykens, et al., Improving architectural design analysis using 3D modeling and visualization techniques, Digit. Herit. Proc. 14th Int. Conf. Virtual Syst.
Multimedia (2008).
[22] R. Quattrini, et al., Knowledge-based data enrichment for HBIM: Exploring high-quality models using the semantic-web, J. Cult. Herit. 28 (2017)
129–139.

[23] Y. Zhang, et al., Integration application system of Chinese wooden architecture
heritages based on BIM, LISS 2016 Int. Conf. IEEE (2016).
[24] C. Dore, et al., Integration of Historic Building Information Modeling (HBIM)
and 3D GIS for recording and managing cultural heritage sites, VSMM 2012
18th Int. Conf. IEEE (2012).
[25] G. Alemu, Metadata enrichment for digital heritage: users as co-creators, Int.
Inf. Libr. Rev. 50 (2) (2018) 142–156.
[26] M. Felicetti, et al., Metadata and tools for integration and preservation of cultural heritage 3D information, Geoinformatics (2011) 118–124.
[27] Abowd, Gregory D., et al., Towards a better understanding of context and
context-awareness, International symposium on handheld and ubiquitous
computing. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1999.
[28] E. Kim, J. Kim, W. Woo, Metadata schema for context-aware augmented reality applications in cultural heritage domain, Digit. Herit. 2015 IEEE (2015)
283–290.
[29] R. Pierdicca, et al., Smart maintenance of riverbanks using a standard data layer
and augmented reality, Comput.Geosci. 95 (2016) 67–74.
[30] B. Naticchia, A. Corneli, A. Carbonari, A. Bonci, M. Pirani, Mixed reality approach
for the management of building maintenance and operation, ISARC (2018).
[31] M.K. Bekele, et al., A survey of augmented, virtual, and mixed reality for cultural
heritage, JOCCH 11.2 (2018).
[32] F. Chionna, et al., Integrating building information modeling and augmented
reality to improve investigation of historical buildings, Conserv. Sci. Cult. Herit.
15.1 (2015) 133–163.
[33] F. Bruno, et al., From 3D reconstruction to virtual reality: A complete methodology for digital archaeological exhibition, J. Cult. Herit. 11.1 (2010) 42–49.
[34] F. Fassi, et al., VR for cultural heritage, international conference on augmented
reality, virtual reality and computer graphics, Springer (2016).
[35] F. Chiabrando, et al., Historical buildings models and their handling via 3D
survey: from points clouds to user-oriented HBIM, ISPRS (2016) 633–640.
[36] A. Fonnet, et al., Heritage BIM integration with mixed reality for building preventive maintenance, EPCGI (2017).
[37] J.O. Wallgrün, et al., Immersive Technologies and Experiences for Archaeological Site Exploration and Analysis, Int. Conf. Spatial Inf. Theory Springer (2017).
[38] A. Osello, G. Lucibello, F. Morgagni, HBIM and virtual tools: a new chance to
preserve architectural heritage, Buildings 8.1 (2018) 12.
[39] F.I. Apollonio, et al., A 3D-centered information system for the documentation
of a complex restoration intervention, J. Cult. Herit. (2017).
[40] L. Roffia, et al., Context awareness in mobile cultural heritage applications,
Interaction 4 (2005) 11.
[41] R. Cacciotti, B. Miroslav, V. Jaroslav, A diagnostic ontological model for damages
to historical constructions, J. Cult. Herit. 16.1 (2015) 40–48.
[42] D.P. Pocobelli, et al., BIM for heritage science: a review, Heritage Science 6.1
(2018) 30.
[43] D. Oreni, et al., Survey turned into HBIM: the restoration and the work involved
concerning the Basilica di Collemaggio after the earthquake (L’Aquila), ISPRS
2.5 (2014) 267.
[44] P. Pauwels, D. Di Mascio, Interpreting metadata and ontologies of virtual heritage artefacts, Int. J. Herit. Digit. Era 3.3 (2014) 531–555.
[45] R. Quattrini, C. Battini, R. Mammoli, HBIM to VR. Semantic awareness and data
enrichment interoperability for parametric libraries of historical architecture,
ISPRS 42.2 (2018).
[46] S.G. Hart, et al., Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): results of empirical and theoretical research, Adv. Psychol. 52 (1988) 139–183.
[47] L. Pecchioli, et al., ISEE: Information access through the navigation of a 3D
interactive environment, J. Cult. Herit. 12.3 (2011) 287–294.

