Contemporary Issues in Cultural
Heritage Tourism

The perceived quality of a destination’s cultural offering has long been a significant factor
in determining tourist choices of destination. More recently, the need to present touristic
offerings that include cultural experiences and heritage has become widely recognised,
that this aspect of the tourism experience is an important differentiator of destinations, as
well as being amongst the most manageable. This has also led to an increase in the management of such experiences through special exhibitions, events and festivals, as well as
through ensuring more routine and controlled access to heritage sites.
Reflecting the increasing application of cultural heritage as a driver for tourism and
development, this book provides for the first time a cohesive volume on the subject that is
theoretically rich, practically applied and empirically grounded. Written by expert scholars and practitioners in the field, the book covers a broad range of theoretical perspectives
of cultural heritage tourism; regeneration, policy, stakeholders, marketing, socioeconomic development, impacts, sustainability, volunteering and ICT. It takes a broad
view, integrating international examples of sites, monuments as well as intangible cultural heritage, motor vehicle heritage events and modern art museums.
This significant book furthers knowledge of the theory and application of tourism
within the context of cultural heritage and will be of interest to students, researchers and
practitioners in a range of disciplines.
Jaime Kaminski is a Lecturer and Research Fellow at the University of Brighton Business
School (UK) where he specialises in the study of the socio-economic impact of heritage. He
has a long-standing research interest in all aspects of the management of heritage sites, and
their social, economic and environmental impact. Other research interests include the
impact of social enterprise. He is head of heritage research at the Cultural Business Research
Group at Brighton Business School, a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society with IBG
and an advisor to numerous heritage organisations, sites and projects.
Angela M. Benson is a Principal Lecturer in Tourism at the School of Service Management, University of Brighton. Angela has published over 20 articles and chapters in the
areas of Volunteer Tourism, Best Value, Sustainability and Research Methods.
David Arnold is Director of Research Initiatives and Dean of the Brighton Doctoral
College at the University of Brighton, UK. He has been involved in over 40 years of
research in the design of interactive computer graphics systems and their application in
architecture, engineering, cartography, scientific visualisation, dentistry and health and
over the past 15 years on cultural heritage and tourism.

Contemporary Geographies of Leisure, Tourism and Mobility
Series Editor: C. Michael Hall
Professor at the Department of Management, College of Business and
Economics, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand

The aim of this series is to explore and communicate the intersections and relationships between leisure, tourism and human mobility within the social
sciences.
It will incorporate both traditional and new perspectives on leisure and
tourism from contemporary geography, e.g. notions of identity, representation
and culture, while also providing for perspectives from cognate areas such as
anthropology, cultural studies, gastronomy and food studies, marketing, policy
studies and political economy, regional and urban planning, and sociology,
within the development of an integrated field of leisure and tourism studies.
Also, increasingly, tourism and leisure are regarded as steps in a continuum
of human mobility. Inclusion of mobility in the series offers the prospect to
examine the relationship between tourism and migration, the sojourner, educational travel, and second home and retirement travel phenomena.
The series comprises two strands:
Contemporary Geographies of Leisure, Tourism and Mobility aims to
address the needs of students and academics, and the titles will be published in
hardback and paperback. Titles include:
1 The Moralisation of Tourism
Sun, sand . . . and saving the
world?
Jim Butcher
2 The Ethics of Tourism
Development
Mick Smith and Rosaleen Duffy
3 Tourism in the Caribbean
Trends, development, prospects
Edited by David Timothy Duval

4 Qualitative Research in
Tourism
Ontologies, epistemologies and
methodologies
Edited by Jenny Phillimore and
Lisa Goodson
5 The Media and the Tourist
Imagination
Converging cultures
Edited by David Crouch,
Rhona Jackson and
Felix Thompson

6 Tourism and Global
Environmental Change
Ecological, social, economic and
political interrelationships
Edited by Stefan Gössling and
C. Michael Hall
7 Cultural Heritage of Tourism in
the Developing World
Edited by Dallen J. Timothy and
Gyan Nyaupane

9 An Introduction to Visual
Research Methods in Tourism
Edited by Tijana Rakic and
Donna Chambers
10 Tourism and Climate Change
Impacts, adaptation and mitigation
C. Michael Hall, Stefan Gössling
and Daniel Scott

8 Understanding and Managing
Tourism Impacts
An integrated approach
C. Michael Hall and Alan Lew
Routledge Studies in Contemporary Geographies of Leisure, Tourism and
Mobility is a forum for innovative new research intended for research students
and academics, and the titles will be available in hardback only. Titles include:
1 Living with Tourism
Negotiating identities in a Turkish
village
Hazel Tucker

7 Tourism, Ethnic Diversity and
the City
Edited by Jan Rath

2 Tourism, Diasporas and Space
Edited by Tim Coles and
Dallen J. Timothy

8 Ecotourism, NGOs and
Development
A critical analysis
Jim Butcher

3 Tourism and Postcolonialism
Contested discourses, identities
and representations
Edited by C. Michael Hall and
Hazel Tucker

9 Tourism and the Consumption
of Wildlife
Hunting, shooting and sport
fishing
Edited by Brent Lovelock

4 Tourism, Religion and Spiritual
Journeys
Edited by Dallen J. Timothy and
Daniel H. Olsen
5 China’s Outbound Tourism
Wolfgang Georg Arlt
6 Tourism, Power and Space
Edited by Andrew Church and
Tim Coles

10 Tourism, Creativity and
Development
Edited by Greg Richards and
Julie Wilson
11 Tourism at the Grassroots
Villagers and visitors in the
Asia-Pacific
Edited by John Connell and
Barbara Rugendyke

12 Tourism and Innovation
Michael Hall and Allan Williams
13 World Tourism Cities
Developing tourism off the beaten
track
Edited by Robert Maitland and
Peter Newman
14 Tourism and National Parks
International perspectives on
development, histories and change
Edited by Warwick Frost and
C. Michael Hall
15 Tourism, Performance and the
Everyday
Consuming the Orient
Michael Haldrup and
Jonas Larsen
16 Tourism and Change in Polar
Regions
Climate, environments and
experiences
Edited by C. Michael Hall and
Jarkko Saarinen
17 Fieldwork in Tourism
Methods, issues and reflections
Edited by C. Michael Hall
18 Tourism and India
A critical introduction
Kevin Hannam and
Anya Diekmann
19 Political Economy of Tourism
A critical perspective
Edited by Jan Mosedale
20 Volunteer Tourism
Theoretical frameworks and
practical applications
Edited by Angela Benson

21 The Study of Tourism
Past trends and future directions
Richard Sharpley
22 Children’s and Families’
Holiday Experience
Neil Carr
23 Tourism and National Identity
An international perspective
Edited by Elspeth Frew and
Leanne White
24 Tourism and Agriculture
New geographies of consumption,
production and rural restructuring
Edited by Rebecca Torres and
Janet Momsen
25 Tourism in China
Policy and development since 1949
David Airey and King Chong
26 Real Tourism
Practice, care, and politics in
contemporary travel culture
Edited by Claudio Minca and
Tim Oakes
27 Last Chance Tourism
Adapting tourism opportunities in
a changing world
Edited by Raynald Harvey
Lemelin, Jackie Dawson and
Emma Stewart
28 Tourism and Animal Ethics
David A. Fennell
29 Actor Network Theory and
Tourism
Ontologies, methodologies and
performances
Edited by René van der Duim,
Gunnar Thór Jóhannesson and
Carina Ren

30 Liminal Landscapes
Travel, experience and spaces
in-between
Edited by Hazel Andrews and
Les Roberts

38 Backpacker Tourism and
Economic Development
Perspectives from the less
developed world
Mark P. Hampton

31 Tourism in Brazil
Environment, management and
segments
Edited by Gui Lohmann and
Dianne Dredge

39 Peace Through Tourism
Promoting human security through
international citizenship
Edited by Lynda-ann Blanchard
and Freya Higgins-Desbiolles

32 Slum Tourism
Edited by Fabian Frenzel,
Malte Steinbrink and Ko Koens

40 Scuba Diving Tourism
Edited by Kay Dimmcock and
Ghazali Musa

33 Medical Tourism
Edited by C. Michael Hall

41 Contested Spatialities Lifestyle
Migration and Residential
Tourism
Michael Janoschka and
Heiko Haas

34 Tourism and War
Edited by Richard Butler and
Wantanee Suntikul
35 Sexuality, Women and Tourism
Cross border desires through
contemporary travel
Susan Frohlick
36 Adventure Tourism
Steve Taylor, Peter Varley and
Tony Johnson

42 Contemporary Issues in
Cultural Heritage Tourism
Edited by Jaime Kaminski,
Angela M. Benson and
David Arnold
43 Tourism and Citizenship
Raoul V. Bianchi and
Marcus L. Stephenson

37 Dark Tourism and Place
Identity
Elspeth Frew and Leanne White
Forthcoming:
Research Volunteer Tourism
Angela M. Benson

Gender and Tourism
Cara Carmichael Aitchison

Travel, Tourism and Green Growth
Edited by Min Jiang, Terry DeLacy
and Geoffrey Lipman

Mega Tourist Metropolises
Mark Gottiener, Tim Simpson and
Heiko Schmid

Understanding and Governing
Sustainable Tourism Mobility
Edited by Scott Cohen, James Higham,
Paul Peeters and Stefan Gossling
Trust, Tourism Development and
Planning
Edited by Robin Nunkoo and
Stephen Smith

Tourism and Development in
Sub-Sahara Africa
Marina Novelli

Contemporary Issues in
Cultural Heritage Tourism

Edited by Jaime Kaminski,
Angela M. Benson and David Arnold

First published 2014
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2014 editorial matter and selection: Jaime Kaminski, Angela M. Benson
and David Arnold; individual chapters: the contributors.
The right of Jaime Kaminski, Angela M. Benson and David Arnold to be
identified as the author of the editorial material, and of the authors for their
individual chapters, has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and
78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Contemporary issues in cultural heritage tourism / [edited by] Jamie
Kaminski, Angela M Benson, David Arnold.
pages cm. – (Contemporary geographies of leisure, tourism and
mobility)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Heritage tourism. I. Kaminski, Jamie. II. Benson, Angela M.
III. Arnold, David.
G156.5.H47C66 2014
338.4'791–dc23
2013022045
ISBN: 978-0-415-81772-1 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-203-58368-5 (ebk)
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Wearset Ltd, Boldon, Tyne and Wear

For Valentina

This page intentionally left blank

Contents

List of figures
List of tables
List of contributors
Preface
Acknowledgements

xiv
xvi
xviii
xxv
xxvii

PART 1

Theoretical issues

1

1 Introduction

3

JAIME KAMINSKI, ANGELA M. BENSON AND DAVID ARNOLD

2 Heritage and tourism: between practice and theory?

19

GREGORY ASHWORTH AND JOHN E. TUNBRIDGE

3 Views of the vernacular: tourism and heritage of the
ordinary

32

DALLEN J. TIMOTHY

4 Telling the truth or selling an image? Communicating
heritage as an instrument in place marketing

45

ELKE ENNEN AND EUGENIO VAN MAANEN

PART 2

Tensions and dissonance
5 Problems in selling heritage for tourism: a cautionary tale,
with insights from Europe’s (pen)insular margins
JOHN E. TUNBRIDGE

57

59

xii Contents
6 Jasmines for tourists: heritage policies in Tunisia

71

CARLO PERELLI AND GIOVANNI SISTU

7 Heritage regeneration and development in Okinawa, Japan:
Taketomi Village and Shuri Castle

88

DUANGJAI LORTHANAVANICH

8 Heritage as urban regeneration in post-apartheid
Johannesburg: the case of Constitution Hill

101

TONY KING AND M.K. FLYNN

9 Contesting Cairo’s European Quarter: heritage tourism and
pedestrianization of the Stock Exchange Sector

117

WAEL SALAH FAHMI

10 Volunteering around the block: revisiting Block Island’s
Manissean heritage

136

BENJAMIN HRUSKA

11 Atrocity heritage tourism at Thailand’s ‘Death Railway’

151

APINYA BAGGELAAR ARRUNNAPAPORN

12 Decorated Palaeolithic cave sites as a tourism resource:
the Franco-Cantabrian perspective

165

JAIME KAMINSKI

PART 3

Economics and impact

177

13 Seasonal tourism flows in UNESCO sites: the case of Sicily

179

TIZIANA CUCCIA AND ILDE RIZZO

14 Tracing the relevance of Borobudur for socio-economic
development through tourism

200

DEVI ROZA KAUSAR

15 ‘Mobile heritage’: motor vehicle heritage tourism in the
United Kingdom
JAIME KAMINSKI AND GEOFFREY SMITH

218

Contents xiii
16 The value of intangible cultural heritage: the case of the
Fallas Festival in Valencia, Spain

236

BEGOÑA SÁNCHEZ ROYO

PART 4

Future directions

259

17 Cultural heritage tourism and the digital future

261

DAVID ARNOLD AND JAIME KAMINSKI

18 Strategic planning for sustainability and the effect of the
recession at the Roman Baths, Bath, UK

283

STEPHEN BIRD

19 Volunteering and cultural heritage tourism: home and away

303

ANGELA M. BENSON AND JAIME KAMINSKI

20 Cultural heritage tourism: future drivers and their influence

319

JAIME KAMINSKI, DAVID ARNOLD AND ANGELA M. BENSON

Index

338

Figures

1.1 Cultural heritage and tourism groupings from a meta-analysis
of cultural heritage tourism and sustainability
4.1 The commodification process
4.2 Visitors: quantitative and qualitative approach
4.3 The relationship between the position in society and colonial
heritage, sense of place and identity
5.1 Malta: Grand Harbour, Valletta, and Dockyard Creek and
vicinity
5.2 Gibraltar: naval heritage locations relative to the town and
Rock
5.3 Bermuda: Royal Naval Dockyard in relation to Hamilton and
western Bermuda
6.1 Tunisia, the Tunis–Nabeul area and Djerba
8.1 Constitution Hill in the context of the northern inner city. The
railway station (Park Station) is a fifteen-minute walk away
8.2 Constitution Hill looking south
9.1 Restored buildings and street furniture
9.2 Street vendors and stalls
9.3 Urban landscape
9.4 Restored buildings’ façades
11.1 The Chinese Monastery has been built on the far bank while a
long-tailed boat pier and a floating restaurant sit next to the
Bridge
12.1 Options available to access decorated cave sites
13.1 UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Sicily
13.2 Pattern of overnight stays of Italian (solid) and foreign
(dotted) tourists in Sicily
13.3 Pattern of overnight stays of Italian (solid) and foreign
(dotted) tourists in Val di Noto
13.4 Pattern of overnight stays of Italian (solid) and foreign
(dotted) tourists in Siracusa
13.5 Pattern of overnight stays of Italian (solid) and foreign
(dotted) tourists in Piazza Armerina

8
47
49
52
62
65
67
73
104
110
124
124
126
126
159
169
183
185
185
186
186

Figures xv
13.6 Pattern of overnight stays of Italian (solid) and foreign
(dotted) tourists in Agrigento
14.1 Borobudur Temple
14.2 Illustration of current situation in relation to the
organizational purpose of the heritage site
15.1 Non-UK entries in the 2010 London to Brighton Veteran Car
Run
15.2 Gross amounts spent in the Goodwood study area
15.3 Heritage vehicle-related events with more than 25
participating heritage motor vehicles in the UK in 2012
16.1 Choice set example
16.2 An example of a neighbourhood association (comisión
fallera) in a parade
16.3 An example of a ‘Big Falla’ monument in Valencia
16.4 The Offering of Flowers to Our Lady during Fallas Festival
16.5 Districts in the city of Valencia
16.6 Aspects of the Fallas Festival of most importance for
respondents (% most popular)
16.7 The elements that keep the Fallas Festival alive according to
respondents (% most popular)
17.1 Digital model of an ivory wallet, China (~1920), scanned in
3D and displayed (a) as a reproduction of the object with the
original visual properties, left, and (b) as a simulated line
drawing, right
17.2 Digital reconstruction of a proposed extension of the Louvre
Palace, designed by le Pau in 1663
17.3 Procedural model of the Brighton Pavilion porch
17.4 Replacement stones in Ankor Wat in Cambodia
18.1 The ‘tripod of sustainability’ – the business philosophy
behind the Heritage Services business plan
18.2 The basic staff structure of Heritage Services showing the
equal status afforded to the three core areas of activity
18.3 Roman Baths enjoyment and value against ALVA average
18.4 The fluctuations in visitor numbers at the Roman Baths
between 1973 and 2011

187
201
210
220
228
232
243
244
245
249
250
252
253

270
271
272
278
286
288
289
296

Tables

1.1 World Heritage Sites according to region
1.2 Number of World Heritage properties inscribed by each state
party
1.3 World Heritage in Danger by region
9.1 Field survey, February–March 2006
13.1 Descriptive statistics on monthly overnights
13.2 Statistics on seasonality: whole sample
13.3 Statistics on seasonality: Italians and foreigners
14.1 Paradigm shifts in World Heritage management
14.2 Working variables developed to assess socio-economic
impacts
14.3 Comparison of average growth rate in sectors’ value added
between the Borobudur District and Magelang Regency
(2003–2007)
14.4 Institutional problems found at Borobudur and their
implications
15.1 Estimated size of different spectator groups at the London to
Brighton Veteran Car Run
15.2 Estimated expenditure per person of different spectator
groups at the London to Brighton Veteran Car Run
15.3 Total expenditure by different spectator groups at the London
to Brighton Veteran Car Run
15.4 Participant expenditure in Brighton relating to the Veteran
Car Run
15.5 Expenditure sources used to calculate the impact of the
Veteran Car Run
15.6 Economic impacts of the Beaulieu International Autojumble
15.7 Economic impacts of the Goodwood Revival Festival
15.8 Factors that influenced visits to historic vehicle events
15.9 Spectator visitation statistics for the three case study events
16.1 Attributes and attribute levels
16.2 The distribution of questionnaires according to municipal
district

11
12
12
127
189
190
192
203
206
207
212
221
221
222
222
223
226
228
230
231
242
251

Tables xvii
18.1 General trends affecting site performance
18.2 Specific events or influencing factors which have affected site
performance between 2000 and 2012
18.3 Recurring events which affect site performance
19.1 UK volunteering in areas of cultural heritage, 2005–2011
19.2 World Heritage Volunteer Programme, 2007–2013
19.3 World Heritage Volunteer Programme, 2012

293
294
294
304
314
314

Contributors

David Arnold is Director of Research Initiatives and Dean of the Brighton Doctoral College at the University of Brighton, UK. He has been involved in over
40 years of research in the design of interactive computer graphics systems
and their application in architecture, engineering, cartography, scientific visualisation, dentistry and health and over the past 15 years on cultural heritage
and tourism. He was coordinator of the EPOCH Network of Excellence under
the EU’s Framework 6 programme (FP6), involving 95 partners. More
recently he coordinated 3D-COFORM, a large-scale integrating research
project under FP7. He was the founding Editor-in-Chief of the ACM Journal
on Computing and Cultural Heritage and is a past Chair of the European
Association for Computer Graphics. David was educated at the University of
Cambridge and has an MA in Engineering and Computer Science and a PhD
in Architecture.
Apinya Baggelaar Arrunnapaporn is a Lecturer in Cultural Management at
the College of Innovation, Thammasat University, Bangkok, Thailand. Her
PhD in Architectural Heritage Management and Tourism, from Silpakorn
University in association with Deakin University, Melbourne (2007) considered the ‘Interpretation of Atrocity Heritage, the Case Study of the “Death
Railway” of the River Kwai and Its Associations’. She also has an MA in
Museology from the Reinwardt Academie, University of Amsterdam, the
Netherlands (2000) and a BA in Anthropology, from the Faculty of Archaeology, Silpakorn University, Bangkok (1992). Dr Arrunnapaporn has worked
in museum and art institutes for several years in the Netherlands. She is a
Visiting Lecturer in Museum Studies and Cultural Management at several
universities in Thailand. She has also been a consultant on heritage preservation projects and academic coordinator for international exchange programmes. She is a member of ICOMOS Thailand and is Chairman of
Interpretation and Conservation for the International Committee for Interpretation and Presentation (ICIP).
Gregory Ashworth was educated at St John’s College, Cambridge (BA), University of Reading (MPhil) and Birkbeck College, University of London
(PhD). He has taught at the University of Wales, the University of Portsmouth

Contributors

xix

and the University of Groningen. Since 1994, Gregory has held the position
of Professor of Heritage Management and Urban Tourism in the Department
of Planning, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, the Netherlands. His main academic
interests revolve around heritage management, a topic on which he has
published extensively. His publications include: The City in West Europe
(Wiley, 1981), The Tourist-Historic City (Wiley, 1990), Heritage Planning
(Geopers, 1992), Building a New Heritage: Tourism, Culture and Identity in
the New Europe (Routledge, 1994), Dissonant Heritage (Wiley, 1996), European Heritage Planning and Management (Intellect, 2001), A Geography of
Heritage (Arnold, 2001), Senses of Place: Senses of Time (Ashgate, 2005),
Marketing Tourism Places (Routledge, 1990), Tourism and Spatial Transformation (CABI, 1996) and Place Marketing ‘Selling the City’ (Wiley,
1990).
Angela M. Benson is a Principal Lecturer in Tourism at the School of Service
Management, University of Brighton where she has been since January 2004,
having previously held the position of Senior Lecturer at the Southampton
SOLENT University (1995–2004). Due to the research undertaken with Australian colleagues on examining the motivations and legacy of volunteers at
the Olympics (2010 and 2012), Angela was made an Adjunct Associate Professor of the University of Canberra, Australia in 2009. Prior to her career as
an academic, she worked for 13 years in leisure and recreation, managing a
range of facilities and events. Angela has published over 20 articles and chapters in the areas of volunteering (tourism and mega events), best value,
sustainability and research methods. She is the Founding Chair of the Association for Tourism and Leisure Education (ATLAS) Volunteer Tourism
Research Group, Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society with IBG and a
Fellow of the Higher Education Academy.
Stephen Bird is Head of Heritage Services at Bath & North East Somerset
Council. He has worked in museums and heritage management in Bath for
many years. Stephen established Heritage Services as a business unit within
the Council and, in recent years, conceived the Roman Baths Development
Plan to transform the site’s accessibility and retain its position as a leading visitor attraction. Stephen is a past president of the South Western Federation of
Museums & Art Galleries and, until 2009, served on the South West Board of
the Museums Libraries and Archives Council. He is a Fellow of the Museums
Association and a Member of the Chartered Management Institute. Locally,
Stephen sits on the Bath Abbey Development Board and the World Heritage
Steering Group. He lectures on a variety of academic and heritage management subjects, sits on the Advisory Board of the Alexander Keiller Museum
Avebury, is a Trustee of Glastonbury Abbey and a professional mentor with
the Museums Association.
Tiziana Cuccia is Professor of Economic Policy at the University of Catania,
Italy. She obtained a Laurea (BA) in Economics (1991) and a Doctorate in

xx

Contributors
‘Technology and Economics of Production for the Environmental Safeguard’
at the University of Catania (1995), and a Masters in ‘Environmental and
Resource Economics’ at University College London (1993). Her scientific
interests concern the economic evaluation of public goods, issues in cultural
economics, with particular reference to artists’ market labour, and tourism
economics, especially the role of cultural heritage in fostering tourism. Her
publications have appeared in international journals and books. Among her
administrative duties, she was member of Academic Senate of the University
of Catania (2005–2010); appointed in 2007, she was a member of the Ministerial Commission for the study and promotion of creativity in Italy.

Elke Ennen has been an Associate Professor of Visitor Studies since January
2006 at the Applied University of Breda (the Netherlands). She specialised in
visitors connected to heritage. Elke studied human geography at the University of Groningen where she specialised in urban planning. Dr Ennen has a
PhD in the field of urban planning from the same university. Her dissertation
titled ‘Heritage in Fragments: The Meaning of Pasts for City Center Residents’ was presented in 1999. Until 2006 she worked as a Lecturer at the Faculty of Spatial Sciences at the University of Utrecht, in the field of heritage
planning, planning of public spaces and city marketing. Elke is also Editor of
the journal Leisure Studies, which considers research findings and policy
plans in various sub-fields of leisure, including sports, recreation, tourism,
media, volunteer work, use of space and time.
Wael Salah Fahmi was trained as an architect at Cairo University and received
his PhD in Planning and Landscape from the University of Manchester (UK).
He currently teaches architecture and urban design as a Professor of Urbanism at the Architecture Department of Helwan University in Cairo. He is also
a visiting academic at the University of Manchester. Dr Fahmi has conducted
research on Greater Cairo’s urban growth problems and housing crisis (published in Cities). Further research focuses on the rehabilitation of historical
Cairo (published in Habitat International and International Development
Planning Review), the cemetery informal settlements (published in Arab
World Geographer) and the garbage collectors community (Environment and
Urbanization and Habitat International). Other recent publications include
street movements within Cairo’s public spaces (Environment and Urbanization) and Cairo’s European Quarter (International Development Planning
Review).
M.K. Flynn is currently a Research Fellow at the Archbishop Desmond Tutu
Centre for War and Peace Studies at Liverpool Hope University. Previously,
she was a Senior Lecturer in Politics at the University of the West of England
(UWE), Bristol, and an Honorary University Fellow at the Exeter Centre
for Ethno-Political Studies at the University of Exeter. Her research interests
are in the areas of ethnic conflict, transitional justice, peace-building,
democratisation, heritage and public policy. She has a double BA in English

Contributors

xxi

Literature and Political Science (High Departmental Distinction). After then
completing doctoral studies at St Antony’s College, Oxford, she worked at
universities in Israel and Ukraine before taking up her post at UWE. In 2001
she moved to Johannesburg, South Africa, for two years to assist in the starting up of a new offshore campus for Monash University, Australia, before
returning to UWE. She is on the editorial board for the journal Ethnic and
Racial Studies and at UWE convened the University Peace and Conflict
Research Cluster.
Benjamin Hruska serves as the Historian for the US Department of Defense’s
US Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces in Washington, DC. Hruska’s
duties include the launching of a new oral history project at the Courthouse
and managing public programmes. He recently received his PhD in Public
History from Arizona State University and his dissertation covered the sinking of an American aircraft carrier in World War II. Before returning to
graduate school, Hruska served as the Director of the Block Island Historical
Society located on Block Island, Rhode Island. His duties there included
operating the house museum, public programmes and the annual House and
Garden Tour. Hruska has also earned an MA in Public History from Wichita
State University.
Jaime Kaminski is a Lecturer and Research Fellow at the University of
Brighton Business School (UK) where he specialises in the study of the socioeconomic impact of heritage. He began his career as an archaeologist and has
a PhD in archaeology from the University of Reading (1995). He has a longstanding research interest in all aspects of the management of heritage sites,
and their social, economic and environmental impact. Additionally, his work
for the university’s Cultural Informatics Research Group covers aspects as
diverse as heritage tourism, the sustainability of heritage sites and the impact
of information and communication technologies in heritage. Other research
interests include the impact of social enterprise. He is head of heritage
research at the Cultural Business Research Group at Brighton Business
School, a Fellow of the Royal Geographical Society with IBG, a Fellow of
the Society of Antiquaries and an advisor to numerous heritage organizations,
sites and projects.
Devi Roza Kausar graduated from the Faculty of Economics, Padjadjaran University, Bandung, Indonesia, where she majored in Marketing Management in
1998. She obtained her Master’s degree in Tourism Management in 2002
from the Curtin University of Technology, Perth, Australia. Upon her return
to Indonesia in 2003, Devi worked in the Indonesian Ecotourism Network
Foundation (INDECON), an NGO working in the field of ecotourism. In
2007, she left for Nagoya, Japan, to pursue a doctoral degree in the Graduate
School of International Development, Nagoya University. She obtained a
PhD in International Development in 2010 after defending her dissertation on
the socio-economic impacts of World Heritage tourism in rural areas in view

xxii

Contributors

of the management aspects of World Heritage Sites, using the case of Borobudur World Heritage Site. She is now a Lecturer at the Faculty of Tourism,
Pancasila University, Jakarta, Indonesia.
Tony King was Associate Lecturer and Research Fellow in Politics at the University of the West of England (UWE), Bristol. His research expertise is in
colonial history and politics of southern Africa, apartheid and post-apartheid
South Africa, heritage and transitional justice. He studied at the University of
Liverpool and the Institute of Commonwealth Studies before undertaking
doctoral work at the University of Oxford (St Antony’s College). Following
his DPhil, he worked for a policy advocacy NGO in Johannesburg and
Monash University. He has published extensively in journals and edited collections. He has worked with Dr M.K. Flynn on the Nuffield Foundationfunded project ‘Post-Conflict Settlement, Heritage and Urban Regeneration in
South Africa and Northern Ireland: the Redevelopment of the Old Fort and
Long Kesh/Maze Prisons’ (2007–2008) and UWE’s EU/EuropeAid project
‘Reconciliation and Peace Economics in Cyprus’ (2010–2012).
Duangjai Lorthanavanich is Assistant Professor at the Integrated Bachelor’s
and Master’s Degree Programme, Thammasat Business School, Bangkok,
Thailand. She gained her PhD in the Integrated Sciences from the College
of Interdisciplinary Studies, Thammasat University in 2010. Her PhD
addressed issues of state, capital and the community in tourism management in Okinawa, Japan and in Mae Hong Son, Thailand. Her research is
the integration of sociology, anthropology, Japanese studies and tourism to
investigate and clarify community tourism management in Japan and Thailand. She has long-term research interests in Japanese studies, heritage
management and tourism development, and community tourism management in Japan and Thailand. Her current research interest is heritage tourism management in South East Asia and South Asia. Dr Duangjai has
coordinated the planning of the Thailand Tourism Master Plan 2008–2011,
conducting a survey on heritage management for cultural tourism development in Northeast Thailand focusing on the Khmer heritage in Nakorn
Rachasrima and Burirum province.
Eugenio van Maanen is a Senior Lecturer and Researcher in Heritage and Tourism at the NHTV Breda University of Applied Sciences. He is affiliated with
the Academy of Tourism and the professorship of Visitor Studies. Eugenio
studied human geography with a specialisation in international development
studies at Utrecht University. He pursued a PhD at the University of Groningen, the Netherlands, on ‘Colonial Heritage and Ethnic Pluralism: its Sociopsychological Meaning in a Multiethnic Society’. His research and teaching
expertise include tourism product development and planning; heritage and
tourism; uses and meanings of heritage; human resource development and
tourism in developing countries; tourism research methods and techniques;
and sustainability in tourism. At NHTV, he teaches courses in Tourism

Contributors

xxiii

Management and Heritage Tourism. He also teaches in the scientific BSc/MA
programme Tourism, a cooperative venture between NHTV and Wageningen
University.
Carlo Perelli is a Researcher at CRENoS, University of Cagliari and University
of Sassari, Italy. After an inter-disciplinary MA in Mediterranean Studies
conducted between Venice, Montpellier and Madrid, he received his PhD
from the School for Advanced Studies in Venice, for a thesis on the implementation of sustainability policies in mass tourism coastal destinations. His
interests are in tourism geography, planning for tourism, Integrated Coastal
Zone Management (ICZM) and Tourism Carrying Capacity Assessment
(TCCA), mainly in Sardinia (Italy), Morocco and Tunisia.
Ilde Rizzo is Professor of Public Finance at the University of Catania and former
director of the Postgraduate Master on the Economics of Cultural Sector held
by the Scuola Superiore of the University of Catania. She received a Doctor
of Science honoris causa from the University of Buckingham, UK. She was
Pro Vice-Chancellor at the University of Catania (1994–1999), member of
the Italian National Public Works Authority (1999–2004) and also member of
the Public Finance Advisory Committee at the Italian Treasury (2007–2008).
She is currently President of the national independent Commission for Evaluation, Transparency, Integrity of Public Administration (CiVIT). She has published in many fields of public finance (cultural economics, performance
measurement, efficiency of public expenditure, economics of procurement,
health economics), including monographs, edited books and articles in professional journals and several other papers.
Begoña Sánchez Royo has a PhD ‘Sobresaliente Cum Laude’ and ‘Doctor
Europeus’ from the Polytechnic University of Valencia, which focused on the
impact of intangible cultural heritage. She has a degree in Economics from
the University of Valencia, and is an accredited economist. Dr Royo has a
Diploma in Business Administration from the University of Valencia Business School, a Masters in Agricultural Economics from the Polytechnic University of Valencia and a BA in Commerce from Dundee Abertay University
(UK). She is also Assistant Lecturer at the University of Valencia in Master’s
courses related to Cultural and Sustainable Tourism. She has conducted
socio-economic impact studies across Spain, including La Palma, the Province of Alicante and Valencia. Dr Royo is an advisor for the City of Valencia’s nomination proposal for the ‘Cultural Space of the Valencian Fallas
Festival’, which is to be considered for inclusion on UNESCO’s Intangible
World Heritage List.
Giovanni Sistu is Professor of Geography at the Faculty of Political Science,
University of Cagliari, Italy. He graduated with honours in Geological Sciences at the University of Cagliari in 1985. Professor Sistu received his PhD
in Mineral Prospecting at the Faculty of Engineering at the University of
Cagliari. He worked for the Centre for Geo-mining and Mineralogical Studies

xxiv

Contributors

of the CNR (Italian National Research Council). He was Junior Lecturer of
Political and Economic Geography and Environmental Policies at the Faculty
of Political Science, University of Cagliari, between 1995 and 2005. His main
research interests are in environmental policies and local development; cultural tourism and geography in the Maghreb; and water and waste management in the Mediterranean region.
Geoffrey Smith is the Vice-President of the Federation of British Historic Vehicle Clubs (FBHVC) and Co-founder and Director of the Historic Vehicle
Research Institute. Geoff ’s past career in the motor industry began as a training manager. A natural progression was to a role in human resources management, nationally and internationally, his career culminating at Jaguar Cars.
After retirement, he became Chairman of the Federation of British Historic
Vehicle Clubs for five years and Vice-President of the Federation Internationale Vehicules Anciens for eight years, a role involved with strategy and legislation. He initiated the first economic, employment, environment and cultural
study into the UK heritage vehicle movement in 1997 and a similar Europeanwide study in 2006.
Dallen J. Timothy is Professor of Community Resources and Development at
Arizona State University, USA. He is also Senior Sustainability Scientist and
Director of the Tourism Development and Management Programme at the
same university. In addition, Dr Timothy holds visiting professorships at the
Universiti Teknologi Mara in Selangor, Malaysia and Indiana University,
USA. He is also on the Scientific Advisory Board for La Rochelle Business
School’s tourism programme in France. He has published widely on many
different aspects of tourism and heritage. He serves on the editorial boards of
11 international scholarly journals, as Editor in Chief of the Journal of Heritage Tourism, and as a Co-commissioning Editor of the Aspects of Tourism
book series by Channel View Publications. Professor Timothy is currently
working on projects in Europe, Asia, North America and the Middle East
related to religious tourism, intangible heritage, heritage cuisines, heritage
trails, geopolitics and tourism, and cross-border cooperation.
John E. Tunbridge is a graduate of St John’s College, Cambridge and received
his PhD from Bristol University. He joined Carleton University, Canada in
1969 and has since taught in Australia, the UK and South Africa. He is coauthor of The Tourist-Historic City (Elsevier, London, 2000), Dissonant Heritage (Wiley, Chichester, 1996) and A Geography of Heritage: Power,
Culture, Economy (Arnold, London, 2000). His research is concerned with
the various dimensions of the geography of heritage, including tourist-historic
cities, the geography of heritage and managing tourism in cities. Professor
Tunbridge is a Visiting Professor at the University of Brighton Business
School and Curtin University School of Marketing in Perth, Australia; since
retirement from Carleton (as Emeritus) in 2008.

Preface

This edited book is the product of three research groups at the University of
Brighton coming together. The Cultural Informatics Research Group has run two
very large European projects in the ten years since it was founded at Brighton in
2002. The first of these was the EPOCH Network of Excellence in Open Cultural Heritage, which included elements of socio-economic impact analysis and
cultural heritage tourism applications of information and communication technologies (ICTs). The Cubist Research Group (Cultural Business – Impact,
Strategy and Technology) was founded to deliver the socio-economic impact
evaluation methods within EPOCH from a base in the Brighton Business School.
Since 2005 CUBIST has delivered six international symposia on socio-economic
impact and strategies for change in cultural heritage in a series called ‘Heritage
Impact’. Similarly, the Tourism Research Group based in the School of Service
Management has held seven symposia on tourism themes since 2001. Furthermore, associates of the Tourism Research Group are members of the Association
for Tourism and Leisure Education (ATLAS) and have actively supported the
organisation through committee membership and chairing special interest
groups. This relationship led to the hosting of the ATLAS 2008 annual conference, which provided the three research groups with the opportunity to deliver a
joint research agenda on issues related to cultural heritage tourism.
The concept and subsequent development of this edited book came some time
after this event, in that a number of presenters, keynote speakers, academics and
practitioners of the research groups’ networks were encouraged by the debates
that emanated from the event and continued beyond it. These discussions led to
the proposal to draw together the range of material in this edited book, which
is the result of contributions from academics and practitioners with whom
the editing authors have networked for over a decade. The book includes a
broad range of contributions, including theoretical perspectives, wide-ranging
global case studies, practitioner perspectives and novel viewpoints on underresearched areas.
The audience for this book is twofold: first, the academic community as it is
intended to provide a contribution to the literature on cultural heritage tourism.
Undergraduates, postgraduates and PhD students, academic staff and researchers
with a specific interest in cultural heritage tourism will find this book a useful

xxvi

Preface

resource for both mainstream topics and novel viewpoints on under-researched
areas. However, the authors see this book also being used across a broader range
of curriculum areas which includes tourism studies and management; heritage
studies and management; cultural studies and management; cultural geography;
volunteer studies and management; and technology and cultural heritage. The
second audience is non-academic, which includes practitioners, NGOs, policy
makers and governments. It is anticipated that this book will act as a useful
source for this audience to develop knowledge and understanding of this global
phenomenon and will impact on their future decision-making. The practitioner’s
contributions in this book demonstrate a ‘closing-of-the-gap’ between these two
audiences.
Jaime Kaminski, Angela M. Benson and David Arnold
Brighton, April 2013

Acknowledgements

The combined efforts of a large number of people and organisations have made
it possible for this book to be completed:
The Centre for Tourism Policy Studies combined with the Cultural Informatics Research Group to host the Association for Tourism and Leisure Education
(ATLAS) 2008 annual conference under the title of ‘Selling or telling? Paradoxes in tourism, culture and heritage’, assisted by the Cubist Research Group,
all at the University of Brighton. This event provided the catalyst for researchers
on cultural heritage tourism to work together and eventually led to the proposal
to co-edit this book. The editors are grateful to others who helped to make the
2008 conference successful, owing much to Professor Peter Burns and Dr
Marina Novelli (of the School of Service Management), and to Jim McLoughlin
and Babak Sodagar of the Brighton Business School.
Further, the keynote speakers from this conference, Professor Gregory Ashworth and Professor John E. Tunbridge, deserve special mention for continued
support in the evolution and execution of the book.
This book would not have been possible without the hard work and continuing support of the participants from the Heritage Impact series of conferences,
the participants at the ATLAS annual conference and in particular those that
contributed a chapter: Apinya Baggelaar Arrunnapaporn, Gregory Ashworth,
Stephen Bird, Tiziana Cuccia, Elke Ennen, Wael Salah Fahmi, M.K. Flynn, Benjamin Hruska, Devi Roza Kausar, Tony King, Duangjai Lorthanavanich,
Eugenio van Maanen, Carlo Perelli, Ilde Rizzo, Begoña Sánchez Royo, Giovanni
Sistu, Geoffrey Smith, Dallen Timothy and John Tunbridge. Your support and
professionalism throughout the process was greatly appreciated.
We would like to thank the editorial team at Routledge for all their support
and patience, throughout the publication process – start to finish.
We would also like to thank the management and colleagues at the University
of Brighton for their continued support.
Last but not least, we would like to thank partners, family and friends who
supported us continually during the development of this book.
Jaime Kaminski, Angela M. Benson and David Arnold
Brighton, April 2013

This page intentionally left blank

Part 1

Theoretical issues

This page intentionally left blank

1

Introduction
Jaime Kaminski, Angela M. Benson and
David Arnold

Introduction
During the summer of AD 19, the Roman general Germanicus Julius Caesar set
out for Egypt to tour its antiquities (Tacitus, Annals Book 2: 59).1 While Germanicus’s motives for his Egyptian visit may have been more politically driven
than simply visiting what, even by then, were the country’s ancient sites, he
could do so because there was already a well-established tourist trail (Milne,
1916).2 Even before the Romans, the Greeks had visited Egypt in order to absorb
its culture and history. As early as the mid-fifth century BC, the Greek writer
Herodotus ventured up the Nile as far as Elephantine (Herodotus, The Histories,
Book 2: 5–99).3 Germanicus was not the first and would certainly not be the last
tourist to visit the antiquities of another culture. Heritage tourism has a long
history.
Clearly in the intervening two millennia the profile of the heritage tourist has
changed considerably. Over most of this period the capacity and the desire to
travel specifically to view the culture and antiquities of other societies was primarily the remit of those who had the financial means to afford to travel and the
education to appreciate what they saw. These pre-conditions typified the cultural
heritage tourist long after the Grand Tour had ceased to be part of the normal
education of European nobility. The huge growth of the middle classes spurred
by the industrial revolution created an emergent consumer base with disposable
income and increasing educational attainment, which created a demand for travel
and consumption of cultural and heritage products of all sorts (Towner, 1985).
However, disposable income and at least an interest in historically based narratives remain characteristics of the clientele to whom cultural heritage tourism
offerings will appeal. The demand from this consumer base led to a huge
increase in both the availability and the variety of cultural products during the
twentieth century, which Toffler (1964) called the ‘cultural explosion’.
Driven by cheaper air travel, increased disposable income and leisure time,
tourism is now one of the largest industries in the world. Today, cultural heritage
and tourism are inextricably linked to a global industry of significant proportions, with the perceived quality of a destination’s cultural offering being a significant factor in determining tourist choices of destination. The need to present

4

J. Kaminski et al.

touristic offerings that include cultural experiences and heritage has become
widely recognized, with market surveys demonstrating unambiguously that this
aspect of the tourism experience is an important differentiator of destinations, as
well as being amongst the most manageable. Noticeably, the influence does not
rely entirely upon the actual use of cultural heritage offerings by tourists. The
cultural offering appears to influence consumer choice even when the consumer
does not make the most of the opportunities and cultural heritage assets on offer.
Furthermore, with the current growth in heritage tourism, there is increasing
awareness of a number of critical issues in the sector. Many of these impacts are
witnessed more widely in the tourism sector, but the differentiator with cultural
heritage tourism is that the assets are essentially a non-renewable resource. If
damaged, those resources cannot simply be replaced.
Cultural heritage tourism has the potential to generate both positive and
negative impacts (Popescu and Corbos, 2010). These include economic (Mazzanti, 2002, 2003) benefits, such as employment opportunities, and the direct and
indirect benefits of visitor expenditure. These sought-after economic benefits are
often complemented by social benefits, such as community building and the
enhancement of community identity, pride and stability, along with environmental benefits, such as the resources and imperative to preserve and maintain
cultural and historic sites. The comparatively small number of cultural heritage
tourists with their potential empathy for the local population is also seen as
potentially beneficial (Smith, 1989). As such, when planned and managed effectively, cultural heritage tourism can be a driver for positive change. Conversely,
when poorly managed, cultural heritage tourism can have a detrimental impact
on communities. Cultural commoditization, gentrification and the undermining
of local traditions and ways of life can be compounded by physical damage to
heritage sites caused by inappropriate treatment and uncontrolled visitation.4

Cultural heritage tourism
The terms ‘cultural heritage’ and ‘cultural heritage tourism’ eponymously
combine ‘culture’, ‘heritage’ and ‘tourism’. Culture is one of the more problematic words in the English language (Bennett et al., 2013: 63–8), heritage is little
better, while only tourism can at least claim to have some superficial degree of
standardization. This is further complicated by the differing perspectives from
which cultural heritage tourism is viewed, including academic, public, scientific,
official, governmental, legal and individual, to name but a few. These alternative
perspectives sometimes overlap, sometimes conflict and sometimes run in parallel. Moreover, there is rarely a standard definition for each perspective, such as
academia or the public. The combination of these value-laden words and the different perspectives goes some way to explaining why ‘cultural heritage tourism’
has generated such a plethora of definitions.

Introduction 5
Cultural heritage
All societies have, and have had, a relationship with their past. Consequently,
individuals and societies have always had their own definitions of cultural heritage. It is, therefore, unsurprising that the diversity of definitions for cultural
heritage is enormous and the meaning has changed over time (cf. Jokilehto,
2005). As UNESCO notes, ‘Originally, it referred only to masterpieces of artistic and historic value; now it is used more broadly and covers everything that has
a particular significance to people’ (UNESCO and IFT, 2007, Unit 1: 3). Moreover, this process of evolution continues to this day. The creation of (cultural)
heritage does not stop. Hence the definition(s) will continue to evolve.
Heritage has been broadly defined as ‘something that has been inherited from
the past and which can be passed on to future generations’ (UNESCO and IFT,
2007, Unit 1: 3). Although this definition highlights the potential of heritage to
be passed on to successive generations, as Fairclough (2005: 30) notes, heritage
is not just restricted to those things that ‘we wish to pass on’, but is ‘everything
that we have inherited’, whether or not it is passed on to future generations.
Refining this further, Ashworth (2009) has described heritage as ‘the significance
of the past to the present’.
Of course, in the public consciousness, this nebulous ‘something from the
past’ is widely associated with buildings, monuments and artefacts. These are
often to be found at some point during the heritage tourist’s journey; however, as
Dolff-Bonekämper (2005: 70) has noted, heritage is more than just an object, it
is ‘a societal relationship, an attribution of meaning and value to an object’.
Moreover, this meaning is plural (e.g. values, beliefs, traditions) (Fairclough,
2005: 37). The Faro convention5 articulates such a definition of cultural heritage
in more detail:
Cultural heritage is a group of resources inherited from the past which
people identify, independently of ownership, as a reflection and expression
of their constantly evolving values, beliefs, knowledge and traditions. It
includes all aspects of the environment resulting from the interaction
between people and places through time.
(Faro Convention, Section 1, Article 2)
The variety of definitions and imprecise current usage means that any attempt at
a more precise interpretation will nevertheless be interpreted more broadly. It
remains possible that more precision may prompt more clarity of thinking and
discourse over time, and so we note in passing that adopting Ashworth’s distinction between heritage and history would mean that cultural heritage would be
defined as ‘that of society’s current culture that is located and underpinned by
tangible evidence of the past’.

6

J. Kaminski et al.

Tourism
The World Tourism Organization (WTO) definition of tourism includes ‘the
activities of persons during their travel and stay in a place outside their usual
place of residence, for a continuous period of less than one year, for leisure,
business or other purposes’ (World Tourism Organization, 1993). The WTO also
makes a distinction between ‘excursionists’, who travel for less than 24 hours,
and ‘tourists’, who stay at least 24 hours at their destination. Although this definition is well established, there are differences in the way that tourist flows are
measured across the globe.
Cultural heritage tourism
The convergence between (cultural) heritage and tourism6 has caused profound
changes to both the production and the consumption patterns of cultural heritage
tourism (Urry, 1990; Silberberg, 1995; Jolliffee and Smith, 2001). It is clear that
the distinctive characteristics of cultural heritage resources allow them to play an
unparalleled role in tourism development (Puczko and Ratz, 2007). The OECD
(2009) views this as a basis to increase the tourism attractiveness and cultural
supply offered by local communities. For example, the USA’s National Trust
for Historic Preservation defines cultural heritage tourism from a practitioner
focus as:
travelling to experience the places, artifacts, and activities that authentically
represent the stories and people of the past and present. It includes cultural,
historic and natural resources. Good cultural heritage tourism improves the
quality of life for residents as well as serving visitors.
(National Trust for Historic Preservation, 2013: n.p.)
In essence, the focus of most definitions of cultural heritage tourism is upon
tourists visiting what could loosely be termed ‘heritage places’. In some cases,
an element of learning or education is also included as part of the definition; for
others an element of the ‘personal’ is attached to the visit. This may also include
aspects like diaspora, genealogy (Basu, 2007) and/or legacy tourism (McCain
and Ray, 2003). Furthermore, Timothy (2011: 6) suggests that ‘cultural heritage
tourism encompasses built patrimony, living lifestyles, ancient artifacts and
modern art and culture’. Using our new definition of cultural heritage above, we
might encourage the definition that ‘cultural heritage tourism involves travelling
to experience the current narrative of the tangible evidence of the past and its
relevance today’. Changing interpretations, as well as changing contexts for
interpretation, mean that under this definition the cultural heritage tourism offerings are dynamic and evolving. Since such offerings are constantly being
refreshed, their significance will also change over time.

Introduction 7
Cultural tourism
Cultural heritage tourism is often viewed as a subset of cultural tourism. As with
cultural heritage tourism, there has been a plethora of definitions. Some have
focused on attempting to describe the different attractions visited by cultural
tourists (a technical definition), while others have attempted a more conceptual
approach by describing the motives and meanings associated with cultural
tourism. ATLAS provides both a technical and a conceptual definition:
Technical definition: All movements of persons to specific cultural attractions, such as heritage sites, artistic and cultural manifestations, arts and
drama outside their normal place of residence.
Conceptual definition: The movement of persons to cultural attractions away
from their normal place of residence, with the intention to gather new
information and experiences to satisfy their cultural needs.
(Richards, 1996: 24)
Cultural heritage tourism literature and sustainability
According to the Centre International de Recherches et d’Etudes Touristiques
(CIRET), there are 1,977 documents on the themes of heritage enhancement and
culture (CIRET, 2013) linked to tourism, about a third of the number of documents on sustainability.7 Many of these articles are to be found in the plethora of
journals in the arena of culture, heritage and tourism. Whilst some of the journals are found in the tourism domain (Journal of Heritage Tourism, commenced
2006), others are more generic in their outlook: International Journal of Cultural Studies (commenced 1998); International Journal of Heritage Studies
(commenced 1994); International Journal of Cultural Heritage (commenced
2000); Journal of Computing and Cultural Heritage (commenced 2008) and
more recently the Journal of Cultural Heritage Management and Sustainable
Development (commenced 2011). However, even a cursory search within the
generic journals reveals that tourism-related articles comprise a significant component. What is also evident when examining the literature is the extent to which
the writing is fragmented across a range of themes and over numerous individual
case studies (Ashworth and Tunbridge develop this further in terms of heritage
tourism studies as an academic discipline in chapter 2 of this volume). Loulanski
and Loulanski (2011) undertook a meta-analysis of 483 studies in order to
identify groupings that linked cultural heritage and tourism together within the
broader concept of sustainability. After synthesizing the findings, they produced
a representative set of 15 factors, as outlined in Figure 1.1.
With the growing trend towards sustainability in all aspects of our daily lives,
it is therefore pertinent that we engage in a brief discussion of sustainability and
cultural heritage tourism. The most commonly cited definition of sustainable
development is: development that ‘meets the needs of the present without

Controlled growth

A heritage capital
approach

Incorporation into a
wider sustainable
development
framework

International
governance and
support systems
Effective site
management

Governance and
stakeholder
participation

Authenticity and
interpretation

Destination
management

Market and product
diversification

Sustainability-centred
tourism management

A sound theoretical/
methodological base

Suitable funding
provision

Integrated planning

Figure 1.1 Cultural heritage and tourism groupings from a meta-analysis of cultural heritage tourism and sustainability (source:
Loulanski and Loulanski, 2011).

Education and training

Local involvement

Introduction 9
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs’ (World
Commission on Environment and Development, 1987: 15). There is a comprehensive theoretical framework associated with the concept of sustainable development and there is no doubt that the tourism sector embraces sustainability as a
principle. However, it is also evident that the implementation of sustainability
has been much slower to come to fruition. DuCros (2001) viewed the rhetoric
around cultural heritage tourism and sustainability as one of the main research
issues in terms of what is the most appropriate way for cultural heritage tourism
to be developed. In the last decade, there has been an increase of activity, primarily led by the global institutions, in order to deliver a coordinated agenda on
cultural heritage tourism and sustainability. For example, the Council of Europe
invited the European Association of Historic Towns and Regions (EAHTR,
2006) to develop a set of guidelines to outline how cultural heritage tourism can
be developed to realize its economic and social potential in a more sustainable
way. UNESCO and the Institute for Tourism Studies, Macau, China (IFT),
jointly developed the ‘Cultural Heritage Specialist Guide Training and Certification Programme’ for UNESCO World Heritage Sites. In 2011, the International
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) commissioned a report to examine
world heritage and sustainable tourism, with a view to establishing a list of priorities for action (Borges et al., 2011). Moreover, UNESCO developed the
World Heritage and Sustainable Tourism Programme around the same time
(World Heritage Centre, 2013), with the following vision statement: ‘World Heritage and tourism stakeholders share responsibility for conservation of our
common cultural and natural heritage of Outstanding Universal Value and for
sustainable development through appropriate tourism management’ (UNESCO,
2013b: n.p).
In addition, the World Bank through its Urban Development Series has supported a number of publications (Ebbe et al., 2011; Licciardi and Amirtahmasebi, 2012) to engage in the discourse around cultural heritage tourism and
sustainability. As such, much of the rhetoric, initiatives and advice offered are
still in their infancy and it is therefore too soon to tell the extent of stakeholders’
engagement and consequently whether coherent implementation will happen.
Global trends
In 2011, international tourist arrivals worldwide were 983 million (an increase of
4.6 per cent on the previous year – 940 million), with international tourism
receipts reaching a record US$1,030 billion (€740 billion) (UNWTO, 2011a,
2011b). There is no doubt that tourism is big business. However, establishing the
extent of the market in terms of cultural heritage is problematic because different
countries are using many alternative classifications and definitions and there
appears to be no operational framework for international comparative measurement of the cultural heritage sector (Arnold and Geser, 2008). Despite this, there
are disparate indications of the size of the market and this section will outline
some of the data available.

10

J. Kaminski et al.

The UNWTO (OECD, 2009: 21) reported that cultural tourism accounted for
40 per cent (359 million) of all international tourism, up from 37 per cent (199
million) in 1995. As part of the World Tourism Day 2010, themed ‘Tourism –
Linking Cultures’, the UNWTO (2011c) press release announced that ‘940
million tourists travelled to a different country, coming into direct contact with
tangible – art, monuments – and intangible – music, food traditions – culture’
(n.p.); thereby, inferring that all tourists are cultural heritage tourists! The
problem with this is that it is not consistent with creating a distinctive niche in
an already crowded marketplace.
The ATLAS surveys8 of 1997–2007 indicate growth in the proportion of tourists on a cultural holiday from 17 to 32 per cent (OECD, 2009). The last report
by the ATLAS Cultural Tourism Project (Richards, 2007) indicates that 53 per
cent of visitors were women (similar to previous years); 30 per cent of respondents were aged between 20 and 29 (higher than previous studies); and 70 per
cent had a degree or higher degree – this was reflected in the 70 per cent who
indicated they are managers and professionals. Approximately 30 per cent are
engaged in occupations linked to culture. The top motivation was ‘lots of interesting things to see’. The types of attractions visited were museums, at 64 per
cent, being the most popular, followed by historic sites (51 per cent), monuments
(58 per cent) and religious attractions (42 per cent); these were some way ahead
of the next category, art galleries, at 22 per cent. Pop concerts, world music and
dance events were the three lowest, all at approximately 3 per cent. Rome was
the favourite cultural destination, with Florence ranked third and Venice ranked
sixth, out of a total of 33 cities. This is not surprising when examining Table 1.2,
which shows that Italy has the greatest number of World Heritage Sites listed,
alongside a strong country brand that attracted 46.1 million tourists in 2011,
ranking fifth on the International Tourists Arrivals (UNWTO, 2011a).
The US market is an important source of outbound cultural heritage tourists.
Mintel (2010) found that 29 per cent of US international tourists travel to cultural, historical or religious destinations. This desire for cultural heritage products brings Americans to Europe, in particular the UK, France, Italy and
Germany, accounting for 76 per cent of all arrivals to Europe in 2008. Research
from the European Commission (EC) (EC Flash Eurobarometer, fl_258, 2009)
suggests that 24 per cent of Europeans, when choosing a holiday destination,
consider cultural heritage to be an influencing factor. It also indicates that
Denmark, Ireland and the UK markets are the top three and the Eastern European markets are the least interested, with Bulgaria, Poland and Hungary being
the last three on the country list. Further, Britain has used culture and heritage as
a key offering in its tourism portfolio for decades. In a recent visitor survey, 57
per cent of respondents from 20 countries agreed that history and culture are
strong influences on their choice of holiday destination. VisitBritain (2010)
estimates this market attracts £4.5 billion worth of spending by inbound visitors
annually, which underpins more than 100,000 jobs across the country.
The cultural heritage tourist has grown more sophisticated in their travel
tastes. The OECD (2009) suggests this is a move away from ‘sightseeing’ to

Introduction 11
‘lifeseeing’; as such, this implies a shift from tangible cultural heritage (historic
sites, monuments and museums) to intangible cultural heritage (arts, languages,
music, festivals and pageants). The relationship between tourism and intangible
cultural heritage has not yet been widely studied by the academic community
(UNWTO, 2012: 12).
Whilst cultural heritage tourism is a global phenomenon, the influence of
UNESCO’s heritage list cannot be overlooked as the properties listed are often a
major pull for tourists visiting destinations. By 2012, there were 962 properties
listed; of these, 745 are cultural, 188 natural and the remaining 29 are on both
lists. Since the turn of the millennium, 276 have been added, with two properties
being delisted. In addition, state parties are encouraged to submit properties to
the World Heritage Tentative List. These are properties which are considered to
be suitable for inscription on to the World Heritage List if nominated at a future
date. Currently, there are 1,579 tentative list sites in over 171 countries. Table
1.1 outlines World Heritage properties by region; just under half of the properties (48 per cent) are located within Europe and North America, with Europe
holding the greater share (44 per cent). Of course, the predominance of
UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Europe and North America does not immediately imply that there are more sites of outstanding cultural or natural importance to the common heritage of humanity in Europe compared to elsewhere. It
merely underlines the fact that these countries have been fortunate enough to be
located in a region that has had a fundamental role in instigating and running the
convention (leading to greater awareness), and they have had the resources to
undertake the application process.
Table 1.2 shows that, of the 157 countries where the 962 sites are situated, 25
of the countries have more than ten sites listed. These 25 countries account for
553 of the sites, whilst the remaining 409 sites are scattered over 132 countries.
Ascribing a property to the World Heritage List does not ensure its preservation or survival. In 2012, there were 38 sites on the list of World Heritage in
Danger. This list is designed to raise awareness of the threats to the characteristics for which the property was inscribed onto the World Heritage List and,
Table 1.1 World Heritage Sites according to region
Regions

Cultural Natural Mixed Total

Africa
Arab States
Asia and the Pacific
Europe and North America
Latin America and the
Caribbean

47
67
148
393
90

35
4
55
59
35

4
2
10
10
3

86
73
213*
462*
128

9
8
22
48
13

32
17
32
50
26

Total

745

188

29

962

100

157

Source: UNESCO (2013a).

%

State parties
with inscribed
properties

12

J. Kaminski et al.

Table 1.2 Number of World Heritage properties inscribed by each state party
Country (total 157)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

No of sites (total of 962)

Italy
Spain
China
France
Germany
Mexico
India
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Russian Federation
United States of America
Australia
Brazil
Greece
Canada
Japan
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Sweden
Portugal
Poland
Czech Republic
Belgium
Peru
Switzerland
Turkey
Korea, Republic of
Other (less than ten sites) 132

47
44
43
38
37
31
29
28
25
21
19
19
17
16
16
15
15
14
13
12
11
11
11
11
10
409

Source: Adapted from UNESCO (2013b).

therefore, corrective action is urgently needed. The threats to property come in
many guises – armed conflict, natural disasters, pollution, urban sprawl and
unchecked tourist development. Table 1.3 summarizes the list of World Heritage
in Danger by region. The majority of the properties (42 per cent) are located
within the African region.
Table 1.3 World Heritage in Danger by region
Regions
Africa
Arab States
Asia and the Pacific
Europe and North America
Latin America and the Caribbean
Total
Source: UNESCO (2013a).

Cultural

Natural

Mixed

Total

%

4
6
3
4
4

12
0
1
1
3

0
0
0
0
0

16
6
4
5
7

42
16
11
13
18

21

17

0

38

100

Introduction 13

Contemporary issues in cultural heritage tourism
This edited book takes a broader perspective on the concept of cultural heritage
tourism. Consequently, this collection of 20 chapters from expert scholars and
practitioners in the field of cultural heritage tourism takes an in-depth look at
both the theory and the application of tourism within the context of cultural heritage. The book’s primary themes are: theoretical perspectives of cultural heritage tourism, regeneration, policy, stakeholders, marketing, socio-economic
development, impacts, sustainability, volunteering and ICT, with many of the
chapters drawing on case study data from around the globe: Malta, Gibraltar and
Bermuda (chapter 5); Tunisia (chapter 6); Japan (chapter 7); South Africa
(chapter 8); Egypt (chapter 9); USA (chapter 10); Thailand (chapter 11); France
(chapter 12); Spain (chapter 12 and 16); Sicily (chapter 13); Java, Indonesia
(chapter 14); and the United Kingdom (chapters 15 and 18).
The book consists of four parts. The first part of the book focuses on ‘Theoretical issues’ and consists of four chapters (1–4). This chapter (chapter 1),
written by the editing authors, Kaminski, Benson and Arnold, provides a general
introduction to cultural heritage tourism in terms of definition, sustainability, the
scope of academic literature available and global trends. Furthermore, as follows,
this chapter offers an insight into each of the following chapters. Chapter 2 by
Ashworth and Tunbridge offers a discussion on theoretical underpinning for heritage tourism. They contend that, whilst it might be desirable to use ideas and
techniques from other disciplines, without a structuring paradigm which includes
a core set of concepts and terms, a collective knowledge is difficult to achieve.
Chapter 3, by Timothy, examines vernacular heritage through the lens of the
‘ordinary past’. He believes heritage consumers have shifting interests and a
desire to see how the common person lived in the past. The final chapter in this
section (chapter 4) is by Ennen and van Maanen. They focus on visitor flows and
management in a multicultural context. They believe that ‘identity’ is becoming
an increasingly important criterion in urban development.
The second part, consisting of chapters 5–12, is dedicated to ‘Tensions and
dissonance’. In chapter 5, Tunbridge provides ‘a cautionary tale’ using case
studies of former Royal Navy bases. He suggests that the examples outlined are
illustrations of more complex issues at all levels and are intended to guide public
and professional discourses. Chapter 6 (Perelli and Sistu) discuss how tourism
strategies have been central to the ‘new Tunisia’ by examining the links between
heritage sites and mass tourism development and the extent to which the heritage
narrative has changed course over the decades. Chapter 7 by Lorthanavanich
outlines how in Japan the centralized policies of the 1960s began to meet with
resistance from local communities. Two case studies are used to demonstrate the
different arguments and functions of heritage and the role of interest groups in
cultural heritage management. King and Flynn, in chapter 8, use the Old Fort
prison complex, Johannesburg, as an example of heritage development for urban
regeneration. Whilst the development is not complete, they believe it is still too
early to judge this as failure as it stands as a visual anchor for post-apartheid

14

J. Kaminski et al.

aspiration. Chapter 9 by Fahmi examines the contested spatiality within Cairo’s
European Quarter. In his conclusion, he clearly outlines six key points that have
destabilized heritage tourism development. In chapter 10, Hruska, through the
lens of a public historian, investigates the ‘re-discovery’ of an island’s forgotten
heritage and the extent to which re-constructing the past has been influenced by
genealogy tourism and by a group of dedicated local volunteers. Chapter 11 is
by Arrunnapaporn, who explores the controversy caused by poor interpretation
and commodification of the ‘Death Railway’ in Thailand. The chapter is contextualized by the Second World War and the concept of atrocity heritage tourism.
The final chapter in this section (chapter 12), by Kaminski, considers how escalating visitor numbers to the decorated Ice Age caves of France and Spain are
having a detrimental effect on the cave art. The chapter examines the options
available that allow the public to appreciate decorated caves in a sustainable
manner, and considers the role that virtual solutions can play.
Part 3, ‘Economics and impact’, consists of chapters 13–16. The first chapter
in this section (chapter 13) is by Cuccia and Rizzo, who investigate how seasonality is affected by cultural tourism supply and demand, using UNESCO World
Heritage Sites in Sicily. Their findings suggest that UNESCO inscription is not
effective in its own right in fostering cultural heritage tourism or overcoming the
issue of seasonality. Clearer direction is required by local policy makers and
other stakeholders to overcome the vertical and horizontal fragmentation. In
chapter 14, Kausar offers an analysis of the socio-economic impact of the district
surrounding the Borobudur World Heritage Site, Java, Indonesia – one of the
largest Buddhist monuments in the world, but whose local community is predominantly Muslim. Findings suggest that, while the temple has little relevance
in respect of religion for the local population, it influences the socio-economic
development of the area, particularly though tourism-related activities. A partnership between the University of Brighton (Kaminski) and the Federation of
British Historic Vehicle Clubs (Smith) has enabled a rare glimpse at ‘motor
vehicle heritage’ in chapter 15. This chapter includes three economic impact
assessments from UK case studies – the London to Brighton veteran car run, the
Beaulieu International Autojumble and the Goodwood Revival Festival. Sánchez
Royo, in chapter 16, discusses the value of intangible cultural heritage using the
case of the Fallas Festival in Valencia, Spain. She describes a methodology for
assessing the participants’ value of the festival.
Part 4 draws together the final four chapters (17–20) by examining ‘Future
directions’. Arnold and Kaminski (chapter 17) explore the impact that technology is having on the nature of cultural heritage tourism. They examine the
opportunities offered by the combination of the physical and virtual worlds and
the relationship to past uses of simulated cultural artefacts. They conclude that,
while there are many potential future avenues for technology in cultural heritage
tourism, the barriers to adoption have probably more to do with philosophy, politics and economics than computer science or engineering. In chapter 18, Bird
offers a practitioner’s view of strategic planning for sustainability in respect of
the Roman Baths in Bath. The chapter outlines the successive crises which have

Introduction 15
affected visitor behaviour and how managers in a local authority have used a
number of measures to mitigate them. Volunteers are in many countries a key
component of delivering cultural heritage tourism; Benson and Kaminski, in
chapter 19, examine the role of both domestic and international volunteers and
the extent to which these boundaries are becoming blurred. The final chapter of
the book (chapter 20) is by the editing authors (Kaminski, Arnold and Benson)
and offers an assessment of the global trends which are most likely to affect cultural heritage tourism in the coming decades. They see changes in population,
the economy, environment and society as having being the biggest potential
influence on cultural heritage tourism.

Notes
1 ‘59. M. Silano L. Norbano consulibus Germanicus Aegyptum proficiscitur cognoscendae antiquitatis. . . .’. See http://classics.mit.edu/Tacitus/annals.2.ii.html for a translation.
2 Another well-known traveller of the Augustan era was Diodorus Siculus (i. 44.1; 83.9).
3 For more on Herodotus as a tourist, see Redfield (1985); for the origins of tourism, see
Feifer (1985). See also http://classics.mit.edu/Herodotus/history.2.ii.html.
4 The lack of longitudinal studies of the impact of cultural tourism is seen by some commentators as problematic. In the absence of time depth, there can be a tendency to
ascribe all negative impact to tourism (Wilson, 1993).
5 The ‘Council of Europe Framework Convention on the Value of Cultural Heritage for
Society’ 2005.
6 The nuances between the terms ‘heritage tourism’ and ‘cultural heritage tourism’ are
sufficiently slight that the terms have often been used interchangeably. As Timothy
(2011: 6) notes, ‘the differences, if they exist at all, are rather subtle’.
7 These statistics compare to 530 on wine tourism (CIRET, 2012) and 84 documents on
corporate social responsibility (CIRET, 2013).
8 These are based on the ATLAS Cultural Tourism Project, which commenced in 1991.
The project has focused on the collection of data on the motivations and behaviour of
cultural tourists in destinations and cultural sites around the world (Richards, 2011).

References
Arnold, D. and Geser, G. (2008) The EPOCH research agenda for the applications of
ICTs to cultural heritage, Budapest: Archaeolingua. Also available online at www.
epoch.eu.
Ashworth, G. J. (2009) ‘Do tourists destroy the heritage they have come to experience?’,
Tourism Recreation Research, 34(1): 79–83.
Basu, P. (2007) Highland homecomings: Genealogy and heritage tourism in the Scottish
Diaspora, Abingdon: Routledge.
Bennett, T., Grossberg, L. and Morris, M. (2013) New keywords: A revised vocabulary of
culture and society, Oxford: Blackwell.
Borges, M. A., Carbone, G., Bushell, R. and Jaeger, T. (2011) Sustainable tourism and
natural World Heritage – priorities for action, Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.
CIRET (2012) Personal communication with Rene Baretje-Keller, President and Emeritus
Member of the International Academy for the Study of Tourism. Aix en Provence,
France: Centre International de Recherches et d’Etudes Touristiques (www.cirettourism.com).

16

J. Kaminski et al.

CIRET (2013) Personal communication with Rene Baretje-Keller, President and Emeritus
Member of the International Academy for the Study of Tourism, Aix en Provence,
France: Centre International de Recherches et d’Etudes Touristiques (ww.ciret-tourism.
com).
Dolff-Bonekämper, G. (2005) ‘The social and spatial frameworks of heritage – What is
new in the Faro Convention?’, in Council of Europe (ed.) Heritage and beyond, Strasbourg: Council of Europe, 69–74.
DuCros, H. (2001) ‘A new model to assist in planning for sustainable cultural heritage
tourism’, International Journal of Tourism Research, 3(2): 165–70.
Ebbe, K., Licciardi, G. and Baeumler, A. (2011) Conserving the past as a foundation for
the future: China-World Bank Partnership on Cultural Heritage Conservation, Urban
Development Series: Knowledge Papers. No. 12. World Bank and Urban Development
& Local Government.
European Association of Historic Towns and Regions (EAHTR) (2006) Guidelines: Sustainable cultural tourism in historic towns and cities, Norwich: EAHTR.
European Commission (EC) (2009) ‘Europeans and tourism – Autumn 2009’, Flash
Eurobarometer 281.
Fairclough, G. (2005) ‘New heritage frontiers’, in Council of Europe (ed.) Heritage and
beyond, Strasbourg: Council of Europe, 29–42.
Feifer, M. (1985) Tourism in history: From Imperial Rome to the present, New York:
Stein and Day.
ICOMOS (1976) ‘Charter of cultural tourism’, accessed in April 2013 at www.icomos.
org/tourism/tourism_charter.html.
Institute for Tourism Studies (2013) ‘Cultural heritage specialist guide training’, accessed
in April 2013 at www.ift.edu.mo/EN/Specialist_Guide/Home/Index/271.
Jokilehto, J. (2005) Definition of cultural heritage: References to documents in history,
originally for ICCROM, 1990 and revised for CIF, 15 January 2005 on behalf of the
Heritage and Society Working Group within the ICCROM Strategic Planning Process,
accessed in March 2013 at http://cif.icomos.org/pdf_docs/Documents%20on%20line/
Heritage%20definitions.pdf.
Jolliffee, L. and Smith, R. (2001) ‘Heritage tourism and museums: The case of the North
Atlantic Islands of Skype, Scotland and Prince Edward’s Island, Canada’, International
Journal of Heritage Studies, 7(2): 144–9.
Licciardi, G. and Amirtahmasebi, R. (eds.) (2012) The economics of uniqueness: Investing in historic city cores and cultural heritage assets for sustainable development,
Washington: The World Bank.
Loulanski, T. and Loulanski, V. (2011) ‘The sustainable integration of cultural heritage
and tourism: a meta-study’, Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 19(7): 837–62.
Mazzanti, M. (2002) ‘Cultural heritage as multi-dimensional, multi-value and multiattribute economic good: Toward a new framework for economic analysis and valuation’, Journal of Socio-Economics, 31(5): 529–58.
Mazzanti, M. (2003) ‘Valuing cultural heritage in a multi-attribute framework: Microeconomic perspectives and policy implications’, Journal of Socio-Economics, 32(5):
549–69.
McCain, G. and Ray, M. N. (2003) ‘Legacy tourism: The search for personal meaning in
heritage travel’, Tourism Management, 24(6): 713–17.
Milne, J. G. (1916) ‘Greek and Roman tourists in Egypt’, The Journal of Egyptian
Archaeology, 3(2/3): 76–80.
Mintel (2010) Cultural and heritage tourism – International, May 2010.

Introduction 17
National Trust for Historic Preservation (2013) ‘Historic preservation issues affecting
you’, accessed in March 2013 at www.preservationnation.org/issues/.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2009) The impact of
culture on tourism, Paris: OECD Publishing.
Popescu, R. I. and Corbos, R. A. (2010) ‘The role of urban tourism in the strategic development of Brasovarea’, Theoretical and Empirical Researches in Urban Management,
7(16): 69–85.
Puczko, L. and Ratz, T. (2007) ‘Trailing Goethe, Humbert and Ulysses tourism: Cultural
routes in tourism’, in G. Richards (ed.), Cultural tourism: Global and local perspectives, London: Routledge, 131–48.
Redfield, J. (1985) ‘Herodotus the tourist’, Classical Philology, 80(2): 97–118.
Richards, G. (1996) Cultural tourism in Europe, Wallingford: CABI.
Richards, G. (2007) ATLAS cultural tourism survey: Summary report 2007, accessed in
March 2013 at www.tran-research.com/atlas.
Richards, G (2011) Annual review of activities 2011, accessed in March 2013 at www.
atlas-euro.org/sig_cultural.aspx#2010.
Silberberg, T (1995) ‘Cultural tourism and business opportunities for museums and heritage sites’, Tourism Management, 16: 361–5.
Smith, V. L. (1989) Hosts and guests: The anthropology of tourism (2nd edition), Oxford:
Blackwell.
Timothy, D. J. (2011) Cultural heritage and tourism: An introduction, Bristol: Channel
View Publications.
Toffler, A. (1964) The culture consumers: A study of art and affluence in America, New
York: St. Martin’s Press.
Towner, J. (1985) ‘The Grand Tour: A key phase in the history of tourism’, Annals of
Tourism Research, 12: 297–333.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and Institute for Tourism Studies (IFT), Macao SAR (4th edition, 2007) Tourism at cultural
heritage sites in Asia, Cultural heritage, specialist guide training and certification programme for UNESCO World Heritage Sites, A training manual for heritage guides,
Macao: UNESCO and IFT.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). (2013a)
World Heritage List statistics, accessed in June 2013 at http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/
stat#s1.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). (2013b)
World Heritage and Sustainable Tourism Programme, accessed in March 2013 at
http://whc.unesco.org/en/tourism/.
United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) (2011a) Tourism highlights,
Madrid, Spain: UN World Tourism Organization.
United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) (2011b) UNWTO World Tourism
Barometer, Madrid: UNWTO.
United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) (2011c) Tourism – Linking cultures: UNWTO launches World Tourism Day 2011, PR No 11054, Madrid, 20 Jun
2011, accessed in March 2013 at http://media.unwto.org/en/press-release/2011–06–20/
tourism-linking-cultures-unwto-launches-world-tourism-day-2011.
United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) (2012) Tourism and intangible
cultural heritage, Madrid: UNWTO.
Urry, J. (1990) The tourist gaze: Leisure and travel in contemporary societies, London:
Sage.

18

J. Kaminski et al.

VisitBritain (2010) Culture and heritage: Topic profile, accessed in March 2013 at www.
visitbritain.org/Images/Culture%20%26%20Heritage%20Topic%20Profile%20Full_
tcm29-14711.pdf.
Wilson, D. (1993) ‘Time and tides in the anthropology of tourism’, in M. Hitchcock, V.
T. King and M. J. G. Parnwell (eds.) Tourism in South East Asia, London: Routledge,
32–47.
World Commission on Environment and Development (1987) Our common future,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
World Heritage Centre (2013) World Heritage and Sustainable Tourism Programme,
accessed in April 2013 at http://whc.unesco.org/en/tourism/.
World Tourism Organization (1993) Recommendations on tourism statistics, Madrid:
WTO.

References
1 Introduction
CIRET (2013) Personal communication with Rene BaretjeKeller, President and Emeritus Member of the International
Academy for the Study of Tourism, Aix en Provence, France:
Centre International de Recherches et d’Etudes Touristiques
(ww.ciret- tourism. com).
Dolff- Bonekämper, G. (2005) ‘The social and spatial
frameworks of heritage – What is new in the Faro
Convention?’, in Council of Europe (ed.) Heritage and
beyond, Strasbourg: Council of Europe, 69–74.
DuCros, H. (2001) ‘A new model to assist in planning for
sustainable cultural heritage tourism’, International
Journal of Tourism Research, 3(2): 165–70.
Ebbe, K., Licciardi, G. and Baeumler, A. (2011) Conserving
the past as a foundation for the future: China- World Bank
Partnership on Cultural Heritage Conservation, Urban
Development Series: Knowledge Papers. No. 12. World Bank
and Urban Development & Local Government.
European Association of Historic Towns and Regions (EAHTR)
(2006) Guidelines: Sustainable cultural tourism in historic
towns and cities, Norwich: EAHTR.
European Commission (EC) (2009) ‘Europeans and tourism –
Autumn 2009’, Flash Eurobarometer 281.
Fairclough, G. (2005) ‘New heritage frontiers’, in Council
of Europe (ed.) Heritage and beyond, Strasbourg: Council
of Europe, 29–42.
Feifer, M. (1985) Tourism in history: From Imperial Rome to
the present, New York: Stein and Day.
ICOMOS (1976) ‘Charter of cultural tourism’, accessed in
April 2013 at www.icomos. org/tourism/tourism_charter.html.
Institute for Tourism Studies (2013) ‘Cultural heritage
specialist guide training’, accessed in April 2013 at
www.ift.edu.mo/EN/Specialist_Guide/Home/Index/271.
Jolliffee, L. and Smith, R. (2001) ‘Heritage tourism and
museums: The case of the North Atlantic Islands of Skype,
Scotland and Prince Edward’s Island, Canada’, International
Journal of Heritage Studies, 7(2): 144–9.

Licciardi, G. and Amirtahmasebi, R. (eds.) (2012) The
economics of uniqueness: Investing in historic city cores
and cultural heritage assets for sustainable development,
Washington: The World Bank.
Loulanski, T. and Loulanski, V. (2011) ‘The sustainable
integration of cultural heritage and tourism: a metastudy’, Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 19(7): 837–62.
Mazzanti, M. (2002) ‘Cultural heritage as multidimensional, multi- value and multi- attribute economic
good: Toward a new framework for economic analysis and
valuation’, Journal of Socio- Economics, 31(5): 529–58.
Mazzanti, M. (2003) ‘Valuing cultural heritage in a multiattribute framework: Microeconomic perspectives and policy
implications’, Journal of Socio- Economics, 32(5): 549–69.
McCain, G. and Ray, M. N. (2003) ‘Legacy tourism: The
search for personal meaning in heritage travel’, Tourism
Management, 24(6): 713–17.
Milne, J. G. (1916) ‘Greek and Roman tourists in Egypt’,
The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, 3(2/3): 76–80.
Mintel (2010) Cultural and heritage tourism –
International, May 2010. National Trust for Historic
Preservation (2013) ‘Historic preservation issues affecting
you’, accessed in March 2013 at
www.preservationnation.org/issues/. Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2009) The
impact of culture on tourism, Paris: OECD Publishing.
Popescu, R. I. and Corbos, R. A. (2010) ‘The role of urban
tourism in the strategic development of Brasovarea’,
Theoretical and Empirical Researches in Urban Management,
7(16): 69–85. Puczko, L. and Ratz, T. (2007) ‘Trailing
Goethe, Humbert and Ulysses tourism: Cultural routes in
tourism’, in G. Richards (ed.), Cultural tourism: Global
and local perspectives, London: Routledge, 131–48.
Redfield, J. (1985) ‘Herodotus the tourist’, Classical
Philology, 80(2): 97–118. Richards, G. (1996) Cultural
tourism in Europe, Wallingford: CABI. Richards, G. (2007)
ATLAS cultural tourism survey: Summary report 2007,
accessed in March 2013 at www.tran- research.com/atlas.
Richards, G (2011) Annual review of activities 2011,
accessed in March 2013 at www. atlaseuro.org/sig_cultural.aspx#2010. Silberberg, T (1995)
‘Cultural tourism and business opportunities for museums
and heritage sites’, Tourism Management, 16: 361–5. Smith,

V. L. (1989) Hosts and guests: The anthropology of tourism
(2nd edition), Oxford: Blackwell. Timothy, D. J. (2011)
Cultural heritage and tourism: An introduction, Bristol:
Channel View Publications. Toffler, A. (1964) The culture
consumers: A study of art and affluence in America, New
York: St. Martin’s Press. Towner, J. (1985) ‘The Grand
Tour: A key phase in the history of tourism’, Annals of
Tourism Research, 12: 297–333. United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and Institute
for Tourism Studies (IFT), Macao SAR (4th edition, 2007)
Tourism at cultural heritage sites in Asia, Cultural
heritage, specialist guide training and certification
programme for UNESCO World Heritage Sites, A training
manual for heritage guides, Macao: UNESCO and IFT. United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO). (2013a) World Heritage List statistics, accessed
in June 2013 at http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/ stat#s1.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). (2013b) World Heritage and
Sustainable Tourism Programme, accessed in March 2013 at
http://whc.unesco.org/en/tourism/. United Nations World
Tourism Organization (UNWTO) (2011a) Tourism highlights,
Madrid, Spain: UN World Tourism Organization. United
Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) (2011b) UNWTO
World Tourism Barometer, Madrid: UNWTO. United Nations
World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) (2011c) Tourism –
Linking cultures: UNWTO launches World Tourism Day 2011, PR
No 11054, Madrid, 20 Jun 2011, accessed in March 2013 at
http://media.unwto.org/en/press- release/2011–06–20/
tourism- linking-cultures- unwto-launches- world-tourismday-2011. United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO)
(2012) Tourism and intangible cultural heritage, Madrid:
UNWTO. Urry, J. (1990) The tourist gaze: Leisure and travel
in contemporary societies, London: Sage.
VisitBritain (2010) Culture and heritage: Topic profile,
accessed in March 2013 at www.
Wilson, D. (1993) ‘Time and tides in the anthropology of
tourism’, in M. Hitchcock, V. T. King and M. J. G.
Parnwell (eds.) Tourism in South East Asia, London:
Routledge, 32–47.
World Commission on Environment and Development (1987) Our
common future, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
World Heritage Centre (2013) World Heritage and Sustainable
Tourism Programme, accessed in April 2013 at
http://whc.unesco.org/en/tourism/.

World Tourism Organization (1993) Recommendations on
tourism statistics, Madrid: WTO.

2 Heritage and tourism: between practice
and theory?
Ashworth, G. J. (2009) ‘Do tourists destroy the heritage
they have come to experience?’, Tourism Recreation
Research, 34(1): 79–83.
Ashworth, G. J. and Tunbridge, J. E. (2005) ‘Move out of
the sun and into the past. The blue- grey transition and
its implications for tourism infrastructure in Malta’,
Journal of Hospitality and Tourism, 3(1): 19–32.
Denslagen, W. (1994) Architectural restoration in Western
Europe: Controversy and continuity, Amsterdam: A&NP.
Denslagen, W. (2009) Romantic modernism: Nostalgia in the
world of conservation. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University
Press.
Hewison, R. (1987) The heritage industry: Britain in a
climate of decline, London: Methuen.
Howard, P. (2013) ‘A geographer in heritage. Responding to
“decennial reflections” ’. A response to Tunbridge et al.
(2013). International Journal of Heritage Studies, 19(4):
373–76.
Kavaratzis, M. and Ashworth, G. J. (2005) ‘City branding:
An effective assertion of place identity or a transitory
marketing trick’, Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale
Geografie, 96(5): 506–14.
Kuhn, T. (1962) The structure of scientific revolution,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Larkham, P. (1996)
Conservation and the city, London: Routledge. Lowenthal, D.
(1985) The past is a foreign country, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. Lowenthal, D. (1996) The heritage
crusade and the spoils of history, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. Ruskin, J. (1849) The seven lamps of
architecture, London: John Wiley. Smith, L. (2006) The uses
of heritage, London: Routledge. Tiesdell, S., Oc, T. and
Heath, T. (1996) Revitalising historic urban quarters,
Oxford: Architectural Press. Timothy D. J. and Boyd, S. W.
(2003) Heritage tourism, Harlow: Pearson Education. Towner,
J. (1985) ‘The Grand Tour, a key phase in the history of
tourism’, Annals of Tourism Research, 12(3): 297–333.
Trease, G. (1991) The Grand Tour, Yale: Yale University
Press. Tunbridge, J. E., Ashworth, G. J. and Graham, B.
(2013) ‘Decennial reflections on a “Geography of Heritage”
(2000)’, International Journal of Heritage Studies, 19(4):

365–72. Viollet le Duc, E- E. (1863) Entretiens sur
l’architecture, Vol. 1 (A. Morel & Cie, Éditeurs), Paris:
Imprimerie de L. Martinet. Viollet le Duc, E- E. (1872)
Entretiens sur l’architecture, Vol. 2 (A. Morel & Cie,
Libraires, Éditeurs), Paris: Imprimerie de L. Martinet.

3 Views of the vernacular: tourism and
heritage of the ordinary
Crooke, E. (2007) ‘Museums, communities and the politics of
heritage in Northern Ireland’, in S. Watson (ed.) Museums
and their communities, 300–312. London: Routledge.
Cusack, I. (2000) ‘African cuisines: Recipes for
nationbuilding?’, Journal of African Cultural Studies,
13(2): 207–225.
Cwiertka, K. J. (2006) Modern Japanese cuisine: Food, power
and national identity. London: Reaktion Books.
Derrett, R. and St Vincent Welch, J. (2008) ‘40 sheds and
40 kilometers: Agricultural sheds as heritage tourism
opportunities’, in B. Prideaux, D. J. Timothy and K. S.
Chon (eds.) Cultural and heritage tourism in Asia and the
Pacific, 73–83. London: Routledge.
Ehrentraut, A. (1993) ‘Heritage authenticity and domestic
tourism in Japan’, Annals of Tourism Research, 20(2):
262–278.
Ennals, P. M. (1972) ‘Nineteenth- century barns in Southern
Ontario’, Canadian Geographer, 16(3): 256–270.
Esposito, A. and Gaulis, I. (2010) The cultural heritages
of Asia and Europe: Global challenges and local
initiatives. Amsterdam: Asia- Europe Foundation.
Fairclough, G. (2009a) ‘New heritage frontiers’, in D.
Thérond (ed.) Heritage and beyond, 29–41. Strasbourg:
Council of Europe.
Fairclough, G. (2009b) ‘The cultural context of
sustainability – Heritage and living’, in D. Thérond (ed.)
Heritage and beyond, 125–128. Strasbourg: Council of
Europe.
Falconer, K. (1980) Guide to England’s industrial heritage.
New York: Holmes & Meier.
Frost, W. (2008) ‘Heritage tourism on Australia’s Asian
shore: A case study of Pearl Luggers, Broome’, in B.
Prideaux, D. J. Timothy and K. S. Chon (eds.) Cultural and
heritage tourism in Asia and the Pacific, 305–314. London:
Routledge.
Gable, E. and Handler, R. (1996) ‘After authenticity at an

American heritage site’, American Anthropologist, 98(3):
568–578.
Gaskell, P. and Tanner, M. (1998) ‘Landscape conservation
policy and traditional farm buildings: A case study of
field barns in the Yorkshire Dales National Park’,
Landscape Research, 23(3): 289–307.
Gritzner, C. F. (1990) ‘Log barns of Hispanic New Mexico’,
Journal of Cultural Geography, 10(2): 21–34.
Hardy, D. (1988) ‘Historical geography and heritage
studies’, Area, 20: 333–338.
Harrison, R. (2009) Understanding the politics of heritage.
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Hart, J. F. (1994) ‘On the classification of barns’,
Material Culture, 26(3): 37–46.
Hough, M. (1990) Out of place: Restoring identity to the
regional landscape. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Howie, F. (2000) ‘Establishing the common ground: Tourism,
ordinary places, grey- areas and environmental quality in
Edinburgh, Scotland’, in G. Richards and D. Hall (eds.)
Tourism and sustainable community development, 101–118. New
York: Routledge.
Hueneke, H., Baker, R., Davies, J., and Holcombe, S. (2009)
‘Tourist behaviour, local values, and interpretation at
Uluru: “The sacred deed at Australia’s mighty heart” ’,
GeoJournal, 74(5): 477–490.
Huxtable, A. L. (1992) ‘Inventing American reality’, New
York Review of Books, 39(20): 24–29.
Jackson, J. B. (1984) Discovering the vernacular landscape.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Jackson, J. B. (1990)
‘The house in the vernacular landscape’, in M. P. Conzen
(ed.) The making of the American landscape, 355–369.
London: Routledge. Johnson, N. C. (1999) ‘Framing the past:
time, space and the politics of heritage tourism in
Ireland’, Political Geography, 18(2): 187–207. Johnston, A.
M. (2003) ‘Self- determination: Exercising indigenous
rights in tourism’, in S. Singh, D. J. Timothy, and R. K.
Dowling (eds.) Tourism in destination communities,
115–134. Wallingford: CAB International. Jolliffe, L. (ed.)
(2013) Sugar heritage and tourism in transition. Bristol:
Channel View. Kaups, M. E. (1989) ‘Finnish meadow- hay

barns in the Lake Superior region’, Journal of Cultural
Geography, 10(1): 1–18. Kavoura, A. and Bitsani, E. (2013)
‘Managing the World Heritage Site of the Acropolis,
Greece’, International Journal of Culture, Tourism and
Hospitality Research, 7(1): 58–67. Kilpinen, J. T. (1994)
‘Finnish cultural landscapes in the Pacific Northwest’,
Pacific Northwest Quarterly, 86(1): 25–34. Knudsen, D. C.
and Greer, C. E. (2008) ‘Heritage tourism, heritage
landscapes and wilderness preservation: The case of
National Park Thy’, Journal of Heritage Tourism, 3(1):
18–35. Kruse, R. J. (2005) ‘The Beatles as place makers:
Narrated landscapes in Liverpool, England’, Journal of
Cultural Geography, 22(2): 87–114. Leimgruber, W. (2010)
‘Switzerland and the UNESCO Convention on Intangible
Cultural Heritage’, Journal of Folklore Research, 47(1–2):
161–196. Lewis, P. K. (1979) ‘Axioms for reading the
landscape: Some guides to the American Scene’, in D. W.
Meinig (ed.) The interpretation of ordinary landscapes:
Geographical essays, 11–31. New York: Oxford University
Press. Logan, W. (2009) ‘Hoa Lo Museum, Hanoi: Changing
attitudes to a Vietnamese place of pain and shame’, in W.
Logan and K. Reeves (eds.) Places of pain and shame:
Dealing with ‘difficult heritage’, 182–197. London:
Routledge. Lowenthal, D. (1997) ‘European landscape
transformations: The rural residue’, in P. Groth and T. W.
Bress (eds.) Understanding ordinary landscapes, 180–188.
New Haven: Yale University Press. McCarthy, K. (2007)
Florida outhouses: An ode to the shack in the back.
Charleston, SC: The History Press. McDonald, M. R. (1996)
A guide to Scottish industrial heritage. Edinburgh:
Scottish Industrial Heritage Society. Murray- Wooley, C.
and Raitz, K. (1992) Rock fences of the Bluegrass.
Lexington: University Press of Kentucky. Nagle, J. (2010)
‘Between trauma and healing: Tourism and neoliberal peacebuilding in divided societies’, Journeys, 11(1): 29–49.
Noble, A. G. (1993) ‘Barn entry porches, pent roofs, and
decorated doors of the eastern Midwest’, Journal of
Cultural Geography, 14(1): 21–34. O’Hare, D. (1997)
‘Interpreting the cultural landscape for tourism
development’, Urban Design International, 2(1): 33–54.
Pickard, J. (2007) ‘Australian rural fences: heritage
challenges for conserving the unconservable’, International
Journal of Heritage Studies, 13(6): 489–510. Prideaux, B.
(2002) ‘Creating rural heritage visitor attractions – the
Queensland Heritage Trails Project’, International Journal
of Tourism Research, 4: 313–323. Ritzer, G. and Liska, A.
(1997) ‘ “McDisneyization” and “post- tourism”:
Complementary perspectives in contemporary tourism’, in C.
Rojek and J. Urry (eds.) Touring cultures: Transformations
of travel and theory, 96–109. London: Routledge.

Rudd, M. A. and Davis, J. A. (1998) ‘Industrial heritage
tourism at the Bingham Canyon Copper Mine’, Journal of
Travel Research, 36(3): 85–89.
Ruggles, D. F. and Silverman, H. (eds.) (2009) Intangible
heritage embodied. Dordrecht: Springer.
Ruiz Ballesteros, E. and Hernández Ramírez, M. (2007)
‘Identity and community: Reflections on the development of
mining heritage in southern Spain’, Tourism Management,
28(3): 677–687.
Sears, J. F. (1989) Sacred places: American tourist
attractions in the nineteenth century. Boston: Oxford
University Press.
Schofield, J. and Szymanski, R. (2011) ‘Sense of place in a
changing world’, in J. Schofield and R. Szymanski (eds.)
Local heritage, global context: Cultural perspectives on
sense of place, 1–11. Farnham: Ashgate.
Schofield, P. (1996) ‘Cinematographic images of a city:
Alternative heritage tourism in Manchester’, Tourism
Management, 17(5): 333–340.
Smith, L. and Akagawa, N. (eds.) (2009) Intangible
heritage. London: Routledge.
Sznajder, M., Przezbórska, L., and Scrimgeour, F. (2009)
Agritourism. Wallingford: CAB International.
Teo, P. and Huang, S. (1995) ‘Tourism and heritage
conservation in Singapore’, Annals of Tourism Research,
22(3): 589–615.
Teo, P. and Yeoh, B. S. A. (1997) ‘Remaking local heritage
for tourism’, Annals of Tourism Research, 24(1): 192–213.
Thompson, M. (1979) Rubbish theory: The creation and
destruction of value. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Timothy, D. J. (1999) ‘Built heritage, tourism and
conservation in developing countries: Challenges and
opportunities’, Journal of Tourism, 4: 5–17.
Timothy, D. J. (2011) Cultural heritage and tourism: An
introduction. Bristol: Channel View.
Timothy, D. J. and Boyd, S. W. (2003) Heritage tourism.

Harlow: Prentice Hall.
Timothy, D. J. and Boyd, S. W. (2006) ‘Heritage tourism in
the 21st century: Valued traditions and new perspectives’,
Journal of Heritage Tourism, 1(1): 1–16.
Timothy, D. J. and Nyaupane, G. (eds.) (2009) Cultural
heritage and tourism in the developing world: A regional
perspective. London: Routledge.
Timothy, D. J. and Ron, A. S. (2009) ‘Farmers for a day:
Agricultural heritage and nostalgia in rural Israel’, Paper
presented at the annual conference of the Association of
American Geographers, Las Vegas, Nevada, March 26.
Timothy, D. J. and Ron, A. S. (2013) ‘Heritage cuisines,
regional identity and sustainable tourism’, in C. M. Hall
and S. Gössling (eds.) Sustainable culinary systems: Local
foods, innovation, and tourism & hospitality, 275–290.
London: Routledge.
Tunbridge, J. E. and Ashworth, G. J. (1996) Dissonant
heritage: The management of the past as a resource in
conflict. Chichester: Wiley.
Willits, F. K. (1993) ‘The rural mystique and tourism
development: Data from Pennsylvania’, Journal of the
Community Development Society, 24(2): 159–174.
Xie, F. F. P. (2006) ‘Developing industrial heritage
tourism: A case study of the proposed Jeep Museum in
Toledo, Ohio’, Tourism Management, 27(6): 1321–1330.

4 Telling the truth or selling an image?
Communicating heritage as an instrument
in place marketing
ABS (2006) Statistisch Jaarboek 2005. Paramaribo: Algemeen
Bureau van de Statistiek.
Ashworth, G. J. (1991) Heritage planning. Groningen: Geo
Press.
Ashworth, G. J. (2005) ‘Imagining Newfoundlands’, in
Ashworth, G. J. and Graham, B. (eds.) Senses of place:
Senses of time. Aldershot: Ashgate, 177–191.
Ashworth, G. J. and Graham, B. (2005) ‘Senses of place:
Senses of time and heritage’, in Ashworth, G. J. and
Graham, B. (eds.) Senses of place: Senses of time.
Aldershot: Ashgate, 3–12.
Ashworth, G. J., Graham, B. and Tunbridge, J. E. (2007)
Pluralising pasts: Heritage, identity and place in
multicultural societies. London: Pluto Press.
Carter, E., Carter, J. and Squires, D. J. (1993) Space and
place: Theories of identity and location. London: Lawrence
and Wishart.
Chapin, F. S. J. and Kaiser, E. J. (1985) Urban land use
planning. Chicago: University of Illinois Press.
Dogterom, J. C., Ponec, I. E., Van Den Heiligenberg, E. and
Rutten, J. (1997) Verlangen naar romantische architectuur.
Amsterdam: SFB Vastgoed en bpf- bouw.
Ennen, E. (1999) Heritage in fragments. Groningen:
Faculteit der Ruimtelijke Wetenschappen Rijksuniversiteit
Groningen.
Ennen, E. (2006) Bindingen, belevingen en verleidingen.
Breda: NHTV Academic Studies.
Ennen, E (2007) Dillemma’s in bezoekersstromenland; wat
gaan we (nu weer) beleven?, Breda: NHTV Academic Essays
no. 1.
Huigen, P. P. P. and Meijering, L. (2005) ‘Making places: A
story of De Venen’, in Ashworth, G. J. and Graham, B.
(Eds.) Senses of place: Senses of time. Aldershot: Ashgate,
19–30.

Kuipers, M. J. (2005) ‘The creation of identities by
government designation: A case study of the Korreweg
District, Groningen, NL’, in Ashworth, G. J. and Graham, B.
(eds.) Senses of place: Senses of time. Aldershot:
Ashgate, 205–219.
Lowenthal, D. (1998) The heritage crusade and the spoils of
history. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Rose, G.
(1995) ‘Place and identity: A sense of place’, in Massey,
D. and Jess, P. (eds.) A place in the world? Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 87–132. Sardar, Z. and Van Loon,
B. (1997) Cultural studies for beginners. Cambridge: Icon
Books. Simon, C. (2005) ‘Commodification of regional
identities: The “selling” of waterland’, in Ashworth, G.
J. and Graham, B. (eds.) Senses of place: Senses of time.
Aldershot: Ashgate, 31–45. Tiesdell, T., Oc, T. and Heath,
T. (1996) Revitalizing historic urban quarters. Oxford:
Architectural Press. Tunbridge, J. E. and Ashworth, G. J.
(1996) Dissonant heritage: The management of the past as a
resource in conflict, Chichester: John Wiley and Sons.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO). (n.d.) Historic Inner City of
Paramaribo. Available at http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/940/
(accessed June 2013). Van Diepen, A. and Ennen, E. (2008)
De bestemming als identiteitsverschaffer. Symbolische
betekenissen voor bestemmingen en bezoekers. Vrijetijds
Studies, 26. Van Hoven, B., Meijering, L. and Huigen, P. P.
P. (2005) ‘Escaping times and places: An artist community
in Germany’, in Ashworth, G. J. and Graham, B. (eds.)
Senses of place: Senses of time. Aldershot: Ashgate,
155–164. Van Maanen, E. G. O. M., (2011) Colonial heritage
and ethnic pluralism: Its socio- psychological meaning in
a multiethnic society. Breda: NRIT Media. This page
intentionally left blank

5 Problems in selling heritage for
tourism: a cautionary tale, with insights
from Europe’s (pen)insular margins
Ashworth, G. J. and Tunbridge, J. E. (2005) ‘Moving from
blue to grey tourism: Reinventing Malta’. Tourism
Recreation Research, 30(1): 45–54.
Bojakowski, P. (2011) ‘The Western Ledge Reef Wreck:
Continuing research on the late 16th-/early 17th-century
Iberian shipwreck from Bermuda’. Post- Medieval
Archaeology, 45(1): 18–40.
Bojakowski, P. and Bojakowski, K. C. (2011) ‘The Warwick:
results of the survey of an early 17th-century Virginia
Company ship’. Post- Medieval Archaeology, 45(1): 41–53.
Bonnici, J. and Cassar, M. (1994) The Malta Grand Harbour
and its dockyard. Malta: Bonnici & Cassar.
Cilia, D. (ed.), (2004) Malta before history: The world’s
oldest free- standing stone architecture. Valletta: Miranda
Books.
Craven, W. F. (1990) An introduction to the history of
Bermuda. Somerset: Bermuda Maritime Museum.
Elliott, P. (1980) The cross and the ensign: A naval
history of Malta, 1798–1979. Cambridge: Patrick Stephens.
Finlayson, C. (2010) The humans who went extinct: Why
Neanderthals died out and we survived. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Harris, E. C. (1997) Bermuda forts: 1612–1957. Somerset:
Bermuda Maritime Museum Press.
Harvey, M. (2001) Gibraltar: A history. Stroud: The History
Press.
Hills, G. (1974) Rock of contention: A history of
Gibraltar. London: Robert Hale.
MacDougall, P. (2007) ‘The naval arsenals of the Knights of
St. John’. Transactions of the Naval Dockyards Society, 3:
65–74.
Mascarenhas, A. (2012) ‘Gibraltar plans Neanderthal themed
park’, Gibraltar Chronicle, 14 September 2012.

Quinn, C. and Wiebe, C. (2012) ‘Heritage redux: New
directions for the movement’. Heritage, 15(3): 4–10.
Robinson, M. (2008) ‘Culture beyond heritage: The
experiences of cultural tourism’. Paper presented at the
ATLAS (Association for Tourism and Leisure Education)
annual conference on ‘Selling or telling? Paradoxes in
tourism culture and heritage’, Brighton, July 2008.
Rose, E. P. F. (2001) ‘Military engineering on the Rock of
Gibraltar and its geoenvironmental legacy’, in Ehlen, J.
and Harmon, R. S. (eds.) The environmental legacy of
military operations. Boulder, CO: Geological Society of
America, 95–121.
Smith, P. C. (1970) Pedestal: The convoy that saved Malta.
London: William Kimber.
Tunbridge, J. E. (2002) ‘Large heritage waterfronts on
small tourist islands: The case of the Royal Naval
Dockyard, Bermuda’. International Journal of Heritage
Studies, 8(1): 41–51.
Tunbridge, J. E. (2004) ‘The Churchill- Roosevelt bases of
1940: The question of heritage in their adaptive reuse’.
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 10(3): 229–51.
Tunbridge, J. E. (2008) ‘Malta: Reclaiming the naval
heritage?’ International Journal of Heritage Studies,
14(5): 449–65.
Tunbridge, J. E. (2011) ‘The Capuccini Naval Cemetery,
Malta’. Dockyards (The Naval Dockyards Society), 16(1):
14–16.
Tunbridge, J. E. and Ashworth, G. J. (1996) Dissonant
heritage: The management of the past as a resource in
conflict. Chichester: Wiley.
Tunbridge, J. E., Ashworth, G. J. and Graham, B. J. (2013)
‘Decennial reflections on a “Geography of Heritage”
(2000)’. International Journal of Heritage Studies, 19(4):
365–400.

6 Jasmines for tourists: heritage
policies in Tunisia
Abbassi, D. (2005) Entre Bourguiba et Hannibal. Identité
tunisienne et histoire depuis l’indépendance, Aixen-Provence, Paris: IREMAM- Karthala.
Abbassi, D. (2007a) ‘Modèles identitaires proposés aux
jeunes dans la Tunisie postcoloniale (1956–2006): Entre
nationalisme arabe et imaginaire méditerranéen’, 3èmes
Rencontre Jeunes & Sociétés en Europe et autour de la
Méditerranée, 24, 25, 26 Octobre 2007, Marseille: Céreq.
Abbassi, D. (2007b) ‘Sport et usages politiques du passé
dans la Tunisie des débuts du XXIe siècle’, Politique et
sociétés, 26(2–3): 125–142.
Abdennaceur, J. (2005) ‘Les élèves, l’histoire et
l’identité acceptée. Quête identitaire et visées
institutionnelles: cas de la Tunisie’, Carrefours de
l’éducation, 2(20): 159–174.
Akrout- Yaïche, S. (2002) ‘Local involvement in urban
management: the experience of the City of Tunis’,
International Social Science Journal, 54: 247–252.
Altinay, L. and Bowen, D. (2006) ‘Politics and tourism
interface: The case of Cyprus’, Annals of Tourism
Research, 33(4): 939–956.
Apostolakis, A. (2003) ‘The convergence process in heritage
tourism’, Annals of Tourism Research, 30(4): 795–812.
Ashworth, G. (1994) ‘From history to heritage – from
heritage to identity: In search of concepts and models’,
in Ashworth, G. and Larkham, P. J. (eds.), Building a new
heritage, tourism, culture and identity in the new Europe,
London: Routledge, 13–29. Bacha, M. (2008) ‘La construction
patrimoniale tunisienne à travers la législation et le
journal officiel, 1881–2003: De la complexité des rapports
entre le politique et le scientifique’, in L’Année du
Maghreb, IV, 2008, ‘La fabrique de la mémoire: Variations
maghrébines’, Paris: CNRS Éditions: 99–122. Bianchi, R.
(2005) ‘Euro- Med heritage: Culture, capital and trade
liberalisation – implications for the Mediterranean city’,
Journal of Mediterranean Studies, 15(2): 283–318. Bigio, A.
G. and Licciardi, G. (2010) ‘The urban rehabilitation of
medinas. The World Bank experience in the Middle East and
North Africa’, World Bank, Urban Development Series, May
2010, No. 9. Boudhiba, A. (1976) ‘The impact of tourism on

traditional values and beliefs in Tunisia’, Joint UNESCOIBRD Seminar on the Social and Cultural Impacts of Tourism,
Washington, 8–10 December, 1976. Bourgou, M. and Kassah, A.
(2008) L’Île de Djerba. Tourisme, environnement,
patrimoine, Cérès: Tunis. Burns, P. (2008) ‘Tourism,
political discourse and post- colonialism’, Tourism and
Hospitality Planning and Development, 6: 61–73. Camau, M.
and Geisser, V. (2003) Le Syndrome autoritaire. Politique
en Tunisie de Bourguiba à Ben Ali, Paris: Presses de
Sciences Po. Carpenter- Latiri, D. (2010) ‘The Jewish
pilgrimage of the Ghriba in the Island of Jerba and The
semantics of otherness’, in Ahlbäck, T. and Dahla, B.
(eds.) Pilgrimages today, series Scripta Instituti
Donneriani Aboensis, Vol. 22, Donner Institute: Turku,
38–55. Cernea, M. M. (2001) Cultural heritage and
development: A framework for action in the Middle East and
North Africa, Washington D.C.: World Bank. De Cesari, C.
(2010) ‘World Heritage and mosaic universalism: A view from
Palestine’, Journal of Social Archaeology, 10(3): 299–324.
De Kadt, E. (1979) Tourism: Passport to development?
Perspectives on the social and cultural effects of tourism
in developing countries, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ennabli, A. (1998) ‘The museum of Carthage: A living
history lesson’, Museum International, 198, 50(2): 23–32.
Escher, A. and Schepers, M. (2008) ‘Revitalizing the medina
of Tunis as a national symbol’, Erdkunde, 62(2): 129–141.
Greene, J. A. (1999) ‘Preserving which past for whose
future? The dilemma of cultural resource management in
case studies from Tunisia, Cyprus and Jordan’, Conservation
and Management of Archaeological Sites, 1(2): 43–60. Groupe
Huit (1979) ‘The sociocultural effects of tourism in
Tunisia: A case study of Sousse’, in De Kadt, E. (ed.)
Tourism: Passport to development? Perspectives on the
social and cultural effects of tourism in developing
countries, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 285–304.
Gutron, C. (2010) L’archéologie en Tunisie (XIXe- XXe
siècles). Jeux généalogiques sur l’Antiquité, Paris:
Karthala- IRMC. Hammond, A. (2005) Pop culture Arab world!
Media, arts, and lifestyle, Santa Barbara, CA: ABC- CLIO.
Harrigan, J., Wang, C. and El- Said, H. (2006) ‘The
politics of IMF and World Bank lending: Will It backfire
in the Middle East and North Africa?’, in Paloni, A. and
Zanardi, M. (eds.) The IMF World Bank and policy reform,
London: Routledge: 64–99. Haugbølle, R. and Cavatorta, F.
(2011) ‘Vive la grande famille des médias tunisiens: Media
reform, authoritarian resilience and societal responses in
Tunisia’, Journal of North African Studies, 17(1): 97–112.
Hawkins, D. E. and Mann S. (2007) ‘The World Bank’s role in
tourism development’, Annals of Tourism Research, 34(2):

348–363.
Hazbun, W. (2008) Beaches, ruins, resorts: The politics of
tourism in the Arab World, Chicago, IL: University of
Minnesota Press.
Hibou, B. (2010a) ‘Discipline and reform – I, Sociétés
politiques comparées’, Revue européenne d’analyse des
sociétés politiques, No. 22, February.
Hibou, B. (2010b) ‘Discipline and reform – II, Sociétés
politiques comparées’, Revue européenne d’analyse des
sociétés politiques, No. 22, March.
Hibou, B. (2011) The force of obedience: Political economy
of repression in Tunisia, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hibou, B. and Hulsey, J. (2006)’Domination and control in
Tunisia: Economic levers for the exercise of authoritarian
power’, North Africa: Power, Politics & Promise, Review of
African Political Economy, 33(108): 185–206.
Hibou, B., Meddeb, H. and Hamdi, M. (2011) Tunisia after 14
January and its social and political economy: The issues
at stake in a reconfiguration of European policy,
Copenhagen: Euro- Mediterranean Human Rights Network
(EMHRN).
IACE (2011) Le tourisme en Tunisie: Constat du secteur,
défis et perspectives, Tunis: Institut Arabe des Chefs
d’Entreprises.
INP (2008) Réhabilitation et tourisme durable à Kairouan,
Tunisie. La tradition, les habitants et le tourisme, Tunis:
Institut National du Patrimoine, Tunisie and Consortium
Rehabimed.
Khanoussi, M. (2009) Gestion et conservation du patrimoine
culturel immobilier dans les pays du Maghreb – la Tunisie,
Rabat: UNESCO.
Khlif, W. (2004) ‘L’hôtellerie tunisienne: Radioscopie d’un
secteur en crise’, in L’Année du Maghreb, I, 2004,
L’Espace Euro- Maghrébin, Paris: CNRS Éditions: 375–394.
Larguèche, A. (2008) ‘l’histoire à l’épreuve du
patrimoine’, in L’Année du Maghreb, IV, 2008, ‘La fabrique
de la mémoire: Variations maghrébines’, Paris: CNRS
Éditions: 191–200.

Lesage, D. (1995) Etude de perfectibilité pour la création
du Parc National de Carthage Sidi Bou Saïd, Tunis: UNESCO
Centre du Patrimoine Mondial.
Loviconi, A. and Loviconi, D. (1994) Les faïences de
Tunisie: Qallaline and Nabeul, Edisud, Paris: Cérès and
Institut du Monde Arabe.
McGuinness, J. (1997) ‘Political context and professional
ideologies: French urban conservation planning transferred
to the Médina of Tunis’, Journal of North African Studies,
2(2): 34–56.
Micaud, E. C. (1978) ‘Urbanization, urbanism, and the
Medina of Tunis’, International Journal of Middle East
Studies, 9(4): 431–447.
Ministère de l’Environnement (2010) Indicateurs du tourisme
durable en Tunisie, Edition 2010, Tunis: Ministère de
l’Environnement.
Miossec, J. M. and Bourgou, M. (2010) Les littoraux: Enjeux
et dynamiques, Paris: PUF.
ONA (Office National de l’Artisanat) (2009) Monographie des
activités de la Céramique traditionnelle en Tunisie,
République Tunisienne, Tunis: Ministère du Commerce et de
l’Artisanat.
Palmer, C. (1999) ‘Tourism and the symbols of identity’,
Tourism Management, 20(3): 313–321.
Pieprzak, K. (2010) Imagined museums: Art and modernity in
postcolonial Morocco, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press. Poirier, R. A. (1995) ‘Tourism and development in
Tunisia’, Annals of Tourism Research, 22(1): 157–171.
Republic of Tunisia (2010) Economic and social development
in Tunisia, 2010–2014: Towards an innovation and creation
based growth, Tunis: Republic of Tunisia. Saidi, H. (2006)
‘Vadrouilleurs, Dervishes and tourists: Going between
frontstage and backstage in Tunisia’, Journal of North
African Studies, 11(4): 409–420. Saidi, H. (2008) ‘When the
past poses beside the present: Aestheticising politics and
nationalising modernity in a postcolonial time’, Journal of
Tourism and Cultural Change, 6(2): 101–119. Saidi, H.
(2012) ‘Capital cities as open- air museums: A look at
Québec City and Tunis’, Current Issues in Tourism,
15(1–2): 75–88. Samuels, K. L. (2009) ‘Trajectories of
development: International heritage management of
archaeology in the Middle East and North Africa’,

Archaeologies, the Journal of the World Archaeological
Congress, 5(1): 68–91. Sethom, H. (1979) ‘Les tentatives de
remodelage de l’espace tunisien depuis l’indépendance’,
Méditerranée, 35: 119–125. Sistu, G., (ed.) (2007)
Immaginario collettivo e identità locale: la valorizzazione
turistica del patrimonio culturale fra Tunisia e Sardegna,
Milan: Franco Angeli. Tessler, M. A. and Hawkins L. (1980)
‘The political culture of Jews in Tunisia and Morocco’,
International Journal of Middle East Studies, 11(1): 59–86.
Udovitch, A. L. and Valensi, L. (1980) ‘Communautés juives
en pays d’Islam: identité et communication à Djerba’,
Annales. Économies, Sociétés, Civilisations, 35e année, No
3–4: 764–783. Van der Meerschen M. (1972) ‘La médina de
Sfax, enquête préliminaire à sa régénération’, Moumentum,
VIII, UNESCO- ICOMOS: 5–32. Zaiane, S. (2006) ‘Heritage
tourism in Tunisia: Development one- way choice’, Tourism
Review, 61(3): 26–31.

7 Heritage regeneration and development
in Okinawa, Japan: Taketomi Village and
Shuri Castle
Nakachi, K. (1999) Ryukyu Islands and Okinawans
(Sightseeing and lifestyle). Okinawa: Okinawa Times.
National Diet Library (1993) Shin chihou no jidai: rittai
teki chiiki zukuri no doukou to chousa (New era of local
movement: Direction of regional regeneration and survey).
Tokyo: Survey Division of National Diet Library.
Nishiyama, N. and Shinichi, I. (2006) ‘The possibility of
cultural heritage management by the community: The measure
of cultural heritage management type NPO in Taketomi
Island’, in N. Nishiyama (ed.) Cultural heritage management
and sustainable tourism research. Osaka: National Museum
of Ethnology, 53–73.
Office of the Okinawa Prefecture (1992) Seikai ni otozureru
toropicaru rizooto airando: Okinawa no keisei wo mezashite
(Preliminary tourism development plan in Okinawa: Building
a tropical resort island). Japan: Office of Okinawa
Prefecture.
Office of the Okinawa Prefecture (2006) ‘Okinawa kankou no
sugata: Okinawa Tourists Statistics in 2005’, Naha: Office
of Okinawa Prefecture.
Office of the Okinawa Prefecture (2011) Okinawa kankou no
sugata (Statistics on Okinawa tourism). Naha: Office of
Okinawa Prefecture.
Office of the Okinawa Prefecture (2012) ‘Population of the
town of Taketomi by area (end of January 2012)’. Taketomi,
Okinawa Prefecture: Town of Taketomi. Available at
Ota, M. (2000) Okinawa kichi naki shima e no douhyou
(Towards a future Okinawa without military bases) (second
edition). Tokyo: Shuuei sha shinsho.
Schouten, F. (1995) ‘Heritage as historical reality’, in D.
T. Herbert (ed.) Heritage, tourism and society. London:
Mansell, 21–31.
Smith, M. (2007) Tourism, culture and regeneration.
Wallingford: CABI.
Toguchi, A. (2006) ‘Okinawa kankou seichou no housoku’
(‘Conditions of Okinawa tourism growth’). Retrieved on

August 1, 2006 from Okinawa kankou to keizai (Okinawa
tourism and economics) No. 705: www.sokuhou.co.jp.
Tunbridge, J. E. and Ashworth, G. J. (1996) Dissonant
heritage: The management of the past as a resource in
conflict. Chichester: John Wiley.
UNESCO (2004a) ‘Local involvement in the protection of
World Heritage in Japan’, The World Heritage Report 12:
The state of World Heritage in the Asia- Pacific region
2003. Paris: UNESCO.
UNESCO (2004b) ‘The state of World Heritage in the AsiaPacific region 2003’, The World Heritage Report 12. Paris:
UNESCO World Heritage Centre.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) (n.d.) Gusuku sites and related
properties of the Kingdom of Ryukyu. Available at
http://whc. unesco.org/en/list/972 (accessed June 28,
2013).
Zemans, J. (1999) ‘A comparative overview’, in J. Zemans
and A. Kliengartner (eds.) Comparing cultural policy: A
study of Japan and the United States. London: SAGE
Publications, 19–60.

8 Heritage as urban regeneration in
post-apartheid Johannesburg: the case of
Constitution Hill
Graham, B. (2002) ‘Heritage as knowledge: Capital or
culture?’. Urban studies 39(5–6): 1003–17.
Johannesburg Development Agency (2002) HET Feasibility
Study Report. November. Available at
www.jda.org.za/keydocs/conhill/het_feasibility_study.pdf
(accessed September 18, 2013).
King, T. and Flynn, M. K. (2012) ‘Heritage and the postapartheid city: Constitution Hill, Johannesburg’.
International Journal of Heritage Studies 18(1): 65–82.
Law, C. (1992) ‘Urban tourism and its contribution to
economic regeneration’. Urban Studies 29(3–4): 599–618.
Law- Viljoen, B. (2006) Light on a hill: Building the
Constitutional Court of South Africa. Johannesburg: David
Krut Publishing.
Le Roux, W. (2005) ‘The right to a fair trial and the
architectural design of court buildings’. South African Law
Journal January: 308–18.
Mbembe, A. (2008) ‘Aesthetics of superfluity’, in S.
Nuttall and A. Mbembe (eds.) Johannesburg: The elusive
metropolis. London: Duke University Press: 37–67.
Murray, M. J. (2008a) Taming the disorderly city: The
spatial landscape of Johannesburg after Apartheid. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Murray, M. J. (2008b) ‘The city in fragments: Kaleidoscopic
Johannesburg after Apartheid’, in G. Prakash and K. M.
Kruse (eds.) The spaces of the modern city: Imaginaries,
politics and everyday life. Princeton NJ: Princeton
University Press: 144–78.
O’Donnell, M. A. (2011) ‘Big new development plans for
Constitution Hill precinct’. Engineering News, May 6.
Available at
www.engineeringnews.co.za/article/constitutionhillupgrades- and-refurbishments- 2011-05-06 (accessed
December 1, 2011).
Reid, G. (2005) ‘Reframing Johannesburg’, in E.
Charlesworth (ed.) Cityedge: Case studies in contemporary

urbanism. London: Elsevier, 154–67.
Rogerson, C. M. and Kaplan, L. (2007) ‘Tourism promotion in
“difficult areas”: The experience of Johannesburg inner
city’, in C. M. Rogerson and G. Visser (eds.) Urban
tourism in the developing world: The South African
experience. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers:
265–91.
Shoba, S. (2012) ‘Gauteng broadband project “faces axe” ’,
BDLive, August 6. Available at
www.bdlive.co.za/articles/2010/07/06/gautengbroadband-project- faces-axe (accessed September 7, 2013)
Simone, A. (2008) ‘People as infrastructure: Intersecting
fragments in Johannesburg’, in S. Nuttall and A. Mbembe
(eds.) Johannesburg: The elusive metropolis. London: Duke
University Press: 68–90.
Wessels, M. (2006) Johannesburg inner city performance
indicators 2006. Johannesburg Development Agency.
Available at www.jda.org.za/keydocs/indicator_report/inner_
city2006.pdf (accessed September 7, 2013).

9 Contesting Cairo’s European Quarter:
heritage tourism and pedestrianization of
the Stock Exchange Sector
Bailey, N. (2008) ‘The challenge and response to global
tourism in the post- modern era: The commodification,
reconfiguration and mutual transformation of Habana Vieja,
Cuba’, Urban Studies, 45(5–6): 1079–1096.
Burton, S. (1999) ‘Evaluation of healthy city projects:
Stakeholder analysis of two projects in Bangladesh’,
Environment and Urbanization, 11(1): 41–52.
Chang, T. C. (2000) ‘Singapore’s Little India: A tourist
attraction as a contested landscape’, Urban Studies, 37(2):
343–366.
CULTNAT – Centre for Documentation of Cultural and Natural
Heritage (2007) Cairo architectural heritage: 19th and
20th century architectural heritage of the downtown (CDROM – second edition), Alexandria: Bibliotheca Alexandrina.
Daher, R. F. (2005) ‘Urban regeneration/heritage tourism
endeavours: The case of Salt, Jordan’, International
Journal of Heritage Studies, 11(4): 289–308.
D’Auria, A. J. (2001) ‘City networks and sustainability –
The role of knowledge and of cultural heritage in
globalization’, International Journal of Sustainability in
Higher Education, 2(1): 38–47.
Dokmeci, V., Altunbas, U. and Yazgi, B. (2007)
‘Revitalization of the Main Street of a distinguished old
neighbourhood in Istanbul’, European Planning Studies,
15(1): 153–166.
Egyptian Antiquities Organization (1985) Law no. 117 of
1983, Cairo: EAO.
El Kadi, G. and Attia, S. (eds.) (2002) ‘Restoring Cairo’,
Misr El Mahrousa, Impressions of Egypt, 17: 1–128.
El Kadi, G. and Elkerdany, D. (2006) ‘Belle- Époque Cairo:
The politics of refurbishing the downtown business
district’, in D. Singerman and P. Amar (eds.) Cairo
cosmopolitan: Politics, culture, and urban space in the new
globalized Middle East, Cairo: The American University in
Cairo Press, 345–371.
Fahmi, W. (2009) ‘Bloggers’ street movement and the right

to the city: (Re)claiming Cairo’s real and virtual spaces
of freedom’, Environment and Urbanization, 21(1): 89–107.
Fahmi, W. and Sutton, K. (2003) ‘Reviving historical Cairo
through pedestrianization: The Al- Azhar street axis’,
International Development Planning Review, 25(4): 407–431.
Fahmi, W. and Sutton, K. (2008) ‘Greater Cairo’s housing
crisis: Contested spaces from inner city areas to new
communities’, Cities, 25(5): 272–297.
General Organization for Physical Planning (GOPP) (1997)
The upgrading of valuable districts in Greater Cairo,
unpublished report for the ‘Project for the upgrading of
urban environments of historic districts, terms of
reference’, Cairo.
Gotham, K. (2005) ‘Tourism gentrification: The case of New
Orleans, Vieux Carré (French Quarter)’, Urban Studies,
42(7): 1099–1121.
Grimwade, G. and Carter, B. (2000) ‘Managing small heritage
sites with interpretation and community involvement’,
International Journal of Heritage Studies, 6(1): 33–48.
Kibby, M. (2000) ‘Tourists on the mother road and the
information superhighway’, in M. Robinson, P. Long, N.
Evans, R. Sharpley and J. Swarbrooke, (eds.) Expressions of
culture, identity, and meaning in tourism, Sunderland:
British Education Publishers, 139–150.
Myntti, C. (1999) Paris along the Nile: Architecture in
Cairo from the Belle Époque, Cairo: The American
University in Cairo Press.
Nasser, N. (2003) ‘Planning for urban heritage places:
Reconciling conservation, tourism, and sustainable
development’, Journal of Planning Literature, 17(4):
467–479.
Nuryanti, W. (1996) ‘Heritage and postmodern tourism’,
Annals of Tourism Research, 23(2): 249–260. Poria, Y.,
Butler, R. and Airey, D. (2003) ‘The core of heritage
tourism’, Annals of Tourism Research, 30(1): 238–254.
Raafat, S. (2003) Cairo, the glory years – Who built what,
when, why and for whom, Alexandria: Harpocrates
Publishing. Richards, G. (2000) ‘Tourism and the world of
culture and heritage’, Tourism Recreation Research, 25(1):
9–17. Smith, N. and DeFilippis, J. (1999) ‘The reassertion
of economics: 1990s gentrification in the Lower East

Side’, International Journal of Urban and Regional
Research, 23(4): 638–653. Stewart, D. (1999) ‘Changing
Cairo: The political economy of urban form’, International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 23(1): 103–127.
Stewart, D. (2003) ‘Heritage planning in Cairo. Multiple
heritages in a mega- city’, International Development
Planning Review, 25(2): 129–152. Sutton, K. and Fahmi, W.
(2002) ‘The rehabilitation of Old Cairo’, Habitat
International, 26(1): 73–93. UNESCO (2003) World heritage
papers: Identification and documentation of modern
heritage, Paris: UNESCO. Yuen, B. (2005) ‘Searching for
place identity in Singapore’, Habitat International, 29(2):
197–214.

10 Volunteering around the block:
revisiting Block Island’s Manissean
heritage
American Library Website (2012) ‘Congress granted
citizenship to all Native Americans born in the US, (June
2, 1924)’, in America’s Story from America’s Library,
accessed on March 2, 2012,
www.americaslibrary.gov/jb/jazz/jb_jazz_citizens_1.html.
Block Island Historical Society (n.d.(a)) Blaine
Collection, Block Island, Rhode Island, USA.
Block Island Historical Society (n.d.(b)) Permanent
Manissean Exhibition, Block Island, Rhode Island, USA.
Block Island Historical Society (n.d.(c)) Genealogical
Resource Collection, Block Island, Rhode Island, USA.
Cooley, J. C. (1898) Rathbone Genealogy: A Complete History
of the Rathbone Family Dating from 1574 to Date, Syracuse:
Courier Job Print.
Dubois, C. (2013) ‘DNA Test’, in Ever Widening Circle,
accessed on March 13, 2012,
http://conidubois.wordpress.com/dna test/.
Jaworski, C. (1990) ‘Discovery on Block Island: 2,500-yearold village predates agriculture’, Nor’easter: Magazine of
the Northeast Sea Grant Programs 2(2): 32–37.
Josiam, B. M. and Frazier, R. (2008) ‘Who am I? Where did I
come from? Where do I go to find out? Genealogy, the
internet, and tourism’, Tourismos 3(2): 35–56.
Livermore, S. T. (1877) A History of Block Island: From Its
Discovery, in 1514, to the Present Time, 1876, Hartford,
CT: The Case, Lockwood & Brainard, Co.
Ritchie, E.C. (1955) Block Island: Lore and Legends, North
Haven, CT: Van Dyck/ Columbia Printing Company.
Schwartz, M (1990) ‘Historical discovery on Block Island
uncovered earliest settlement in southern New England’,
excerpted from C. Jaworski (1990), accessed on March 21,
2013,
www.seagrant.gso.uri.edu/41N/Vol1No3/blockislhist.pdf.
Timothy, D. J. (2011) Cultural Heritage and Tourism: An
Introduction, Bristol: Channel View Publications.

Vascamp, P. (2011) ‘Dedication of new marker’, Block Island
Times, July 18: 8.

11 Atrocity heritage tourism at
Thailand’s ‘Death Railway’
Australian–Thai Chamber of Commerce (2004) Hellfire Pass
Memorial, Bangkok: Australian- Thai Chamber of Commerce.
Cohen, E. (1988) ‘Authenticity and commoditization in
tourism’, Annals of Tourism Research, 15: 371–86.
Governing Court (2010) Governing Court Statement, Bangkok:
Governing Court.
Haseman, J. B. (2002) The Thai resistance movement during
World War II, Bangkok: Silkworm Books.
Hellfire Pass Memorial Museum (2011) Hellfire Pass Memorial
Museum Annual Report 2010, Kanchanaburi: Hellfire Pass
Memorial Museum.
Hewison, R. (1987) The heritage industry, London: Methuen.
Hewison, R. (1989) ‘Heritage: An interpretation’, in Uzzel,
D. (ed.) Heritage interpretation, Vol. 1, London: Belhaven
Press.
Kuypers, P. and Broekhuis, C. (1991) Treasury of the
future: On museums and cultural preservation, Amsterdam:
De Balie.
Lennon, J. and Foley, M. (2000) Dark tourism, London:
Continuum.
Lowenthal, D. (1996) The past is a foreign country,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McKercher, B. and du Cros, H. (2002) Cultural tourism: The
partnership between tourism and cultural heritage
management, New York: The Haworth Hospitality Press.
Ngamcachonkulkid, S. (2010) Free Thai: The new history of
the Seri Thai movement, Bangkok: Chulalongkorn University
Press.
Reynolds, B. E. (2010) Thailand’s secret war: OSS, SOE and
the Free Thai Underground during World War II, London:
Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, K. (2007) Cultural landscape, Sydney: Australia
National University Press.

Tourism Authority of Thailand (2013) Tourism statistics,
Kanchanaburi Province 2007, accessed 21 March, 2013 at
http://www2.tat.or.th/stat/web/static_tst.php.
Tunbridge, J. E. and Ashworth, G. J. (1996) Dissonant
heritage: The management of the past as a resource in
conflict, New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Walsh, J. (1992) The representation of the past, London:
Routledge.
Wiriyawit, W. (1997) Free Thai: Personal recollection and
official document, Bangkok: White Lotus.

12 Decorated Palaeolithic cave sites as a
tourism resource: the Franco-Cantabrian
perspective
Ruspoli, M. (1987) The cave of Lascaux: The final
photographic record, London: Thames and Hudson.
Sautuola, M. S. de (1880) Breves apuntes sobre algunos
objetos prehistóricos de la provincia de Santander,
Santander: Telesforo Martinez.
White, R., Mensan, R., Bourrillon, R., Cretin, C., Higham,
T. F. G., Clark, A. E., Sisk, M. L., Tartar, E., Gardère,
P., Goldberg, P., Pelegrin, J., Valladas, H.,
Tisnérat-Laborde, N., de Sanoit, J., Chambellan, D., and
Chiotti, L. (2012) ‘Context and dating of Aurignacian
vulvar representations from Abri Castanet, France’,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, May 29,
109(22): 8450–5.

13 Seasonal tourism flows in UNESCO
sites: the case of Sicily
Arezki, R., Cherif, R. and Piotrowski, J. (2009) ‘Tourism
specialization and economic development: Evidence from the
UNESCO World Heritage List’, IMF Working Paper, No. 176.
Bellini, E., Gasparino, U., Del Corpo, B. and Malizia, W.
(2007) Impact of cultural tourism upon urban economies: An
econometric exercise, Fondazione Eni – Enrico Mattei,
Working Paper No.85.
Bonet, L. (2011) ‘Cultural tourism’, in R. Towse (ed.) A
handbook of cultural economics, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar,
166–171.
Candela, G., Giannerini, S. and Scorcu, A. E. (2007)
‘Flussi e caratteristiche delle destinazioni e dei turismi.
Una nota introduttiva’, Economia dei Servizi, 2: 47–58.
Cellini, R. (2011) ‘Is UNESCO recognition effective in
fostering tourism? A comment on Yang, Lin and Han’,
Tourism Management, 32(2): 452–454.
Cuccia, T. (2012) ‘It is worth being inscribed in the World
Heritage List? A case study of “The Baroque cities in Val
di Noto” (Sicily)’, SSSRN Working Paper, No. 2027892.
Cuccia, T. and Rizzo, I. (2011a) ‘Tourism seasonality in
cultural destinations: Empirical evidence from Sicily’,
Tourism Management, 32(3): 589–595.
Cuccia, T. and Rizzo, I. (2011b) ‘Heritage and tourism:
Theoretical and empirical issues’, Tourismos, 6(3): 37–56.
Del Corpo, B., Gasparino, U., Bellini, E. and Malizia, W.
(2008) ‘Effects of tourism upon the economy of small and
medium- sized European cities. Cultural tourists and “the
others” ’, FEEM Working Paper, No. 44,
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
abstract_id=1140611.
Frey, B. and Steiner, L. (2011) ‘World Heritage List: Does
it make sense?’ International Journal of Cultural Policy,
17(5): 555–573.
Gallup Organisation, Hungary (2009a) ‘Survey on the
attitudes of Europeans towards tourism’, Analytical Report
conducted on behalf of the Directorate General Enterprise
and Industry, Flash EB Series #258,

http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/flash/fl_258_ en.pdf
(accessed March 23, 2013).
Gallup Organisation, Hungary (2009b) ‘Europeans and
tourism’, Analytical Report Autumn 2009, conducted upon
the request of Directorate General Enterprise and Industry,
Flash EB Series #281,
http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/flash/fl_281_en.pdf
(accessed March 23, 2013).
Gamboni, D. L. (2001) ‘World Heritage: Shield or target’,
Conservation: The Getty Conservation Institute Newsletter,
XVI/2: 5–11.
Hawkins, D. E. (2004) ‘Sustainable tourism competitiveness
clusters: Application to World Heritage Sites network
development in Indonesia’, Asia Pacific Journal of Tourism
Research, 9(3): 293–307.
Hui, T. K., and Yuen, C. C. (2002) ‘A study in the seasonal
variation of Japanese tourist arrivals in Singapore’,
Tourism Management, 23(2): 127–131.
ICOMOS (2002) International cultural tourism charter.
Principles and guidelines for managing tourism at places
of cultural and heritage significance, ICOMOS International
Cultural Tourism Committee.
Lundtorp, S. (2001) ‘Measuring tourism seasonality’, in T.
Baum and S. Lundtorp (eds.) Seasonality in tourism,
Oxford: Pergamon, 23–50. Mazanec, A., Wober, K. and Zins,
A. H. (2007) ‘Tourism destination competitiveness: From
definition to explanation?’, Journal of Travel Research,
46(1): 86–95. McKercher, B. (2002) ‘Towards a
classification of cultural tourists’, International
Journal of Tourism Research, 4: 29–38. OECD (2009) The
impact of culture on tourism, OECD: Paris. OpenStreetMap.
Available at www.openstreetmap.org/ (accessed June 28,
2013). Peacock, A. T. and Rizzo, I. (2008) The heritage
game: Economics, policy and practice, Oxford: Oxford
University Press. Pedersen, A. (2002) Managing tourism at
World Heritage Sites: A practical manual for World
Heritage Site managers, UNESCO,
whc.unesco.org/uploads/activities/documents/activity113-2.pdf. Richards, G. (2003) ‘What is cultural tourism?’,
in A. van Maaren (ed.) Erfgoed voor Toerisme, Nationaal
Contact Monumenten (www.docstoc.com/docs/2554594/).
Richards, G. (2007) ‘ATLAS Cultural tourism survey: Summary
report’, www.tram-

14 Tracing the relevance of Borobudur for
socio-economic development through
tourism
Greffe, X. (1994) ‘Is tourism a lever for economic and
social development?’, in Bramwell, B. and Lane, B. (eds.)
Rural tourism and sustainable rural development. Clevedon:
Channel View Publications, 22–40.
Gunn, C. A. (1994) Tourism planning: Basics, concepts and
cases (3rd edition). Philadelphia: Taylor & Francis.
Hall, C. M. (2000) Tourism planning: Policies, planning and
relationships. Harlow: Prentice- Hall.
Hall, C. M. (2006) ‘Implementing the World Heritage
Convention: What happens after listing?’, in Leask, A. and
Fyall, A. (eds.) Managing World Heritage Sites. Oxford:
Elsevier Butterworth- Heinemann, 18–32.
Hall, D., Mitchell, M. and Roberts, L. (2003) ‘Tourism and
the countryside: Dynamic relationships’, in Hall, D.,
Mitchell, M. and Roberts, L. (eds.) New directions in rural
tourism. Aldershot: Ashgate, 3–15.
Hampton, M. P. (2005) ‘Heritage, local communities and
economic development’, Annals of Tourism Research, 32(3):
735–759.
Jamal, T. and Getz, D. (1995) ‘Collaboration theory and
community tourism planning’, Annals of Tourism Research,
22(1): 186–204.
JICA (1979) Borobudur Prambanan national archaeological
parks final report. Tokyo: Japan International Cooperation
Agency.
Kausar, D. R. (2010) ‘Socio- economic impacts of tourism on
a World Heritage Site: Case study of rural Borobudur,
Indonesia’, unpublished PhD dissertation. Nagoya: Nagoya
University.
Kausar, D. R. (2011) ‘Socio- economic impacts of heritage
tourism on its locality: A case study of Borobudur temple
compounds World Heritage Site, Central Java’, Forum of
International Development Studies, 40: 131–150.
Keitumetse, S. O. (2009) ‘Sustainable development and
cultural heritage management in Botswana: Towards
sustainable communities’, Sustainable Development, 19(1):

49–59.
Leask, A. (2006) ‘World Heritage designation’, in Leask, A.
and Fyall, A. (eds.) Managing World Heritage Sites. Oxford:
Elsevier Butterworth- Heinemann, 5–19.
Liew, J. (1980) ‘Tourism and development: A reexamination’, in Pearce, D. (ed.) Tourism in the South
Pacific. The contribution of research to development and
planning. Christchurch: University of Christchurch, 13–17.
Mason, P. (2003) Tourism impacts, planning and management.
Oxford: Butterworth- Heinemann.
Matsuura, K. (2008) Keynote speech, in World Heritage and
public works: Development cooperation for poverty
alleviation seminar, Tokyo, Japan, August 29. Tokyo: United
Nations University.
Millar, S. (2006) ‘Stakeholders and community
participation’, in Leask, A. and Fyall, A. (eds.) Managing
World Heritage Sites. Oxford: Elsevier ButterworthHeinemann, 37–54.
Nagaoka, M. (2011) Borobudur the road to recovery:
Community- based rehabilitation work and sustainable
tourism development. Jakarta: UNESCO.
Ndoro, W. and Pwiti, G. (2005) ‘Heritage management in
Southern Africa’, in Corsane, G. (ed.) Heritage, museums
and galleries: An introduction. Abingdon: Routledge,
154–168.
Novelli, M. and Gebhardt, K. (2007) ‘Community based
tourism in Namibia: “Reality show” or “window dressing”?’,
Current Issues in Tourism, 10(5): 443–479.
Nuryanti, W. (1996) ‘Heritage and postmodern tourism’,
Annals of Tourism Research, 23(2): 249–260. Pizam, A.
(1978) ‘Tourism impacts: The social costs to the
destination community as perceived by its residents’,
Journal of Travel Research, 16(3): 8–12. Regional Planning
Agency of Magelang Regency (2007) Regional income report.
Magelang, Central Java Province: Regional Planning Agency
of Magelang Regency. Rizzo, I. and Mignosa, A. (2006)
‘Policy decisions and cultural heritage impact’, in
McLoughlin, J., Kaminski, J. and Sodagar, B. (eds.)
Heritage Impact 2005. Budapest: Archaeolingua, 58–68.
Soeroso, A. (2006) ‘Valuing Borobudur heritage area in a
multi- attribute framework environmental economic

perspective and its ecotourism management policy
implications’, unpublished PhD dissertation (in
Indonesian). Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University. Soeroso,
A. (2007) ‘Nilai Ekonomi Konservasi Saujana Budaya Kawasan
Borobudur: Sebuah Eksperimen Pilihan’ (‘Economic value of
the Saujana Borobudur cultural conservation area: A choice
experiment’), Journal Of Indonesian Economy and Business,
22(3), 343–61. Taylor, K. (2003) ‘Cultural landscape as
open air museum: Borobudur World Heritage Site and its
setting’, Humanities Research, 10(2): 51–62. Timothy, D. J.
and Nyaupane, G. P. (2009) Cultural heritage and tourism in
the developing world: A regional perspective. London:
Routledge. UNESCO (1990) Nomination Dossier of Borobudur
and Prambanan Temple compounds Indonesia for inclusion in
the World Heritage List. Paris: UNESCO. UNESCO (1996)
Operational guidelines for the implementation of the World
Heritage Convention. Paris: UNESCO World Heritage Centre.
Urry, J. (1996) ‘The changing economics of the tourist
industry’, in Apostolopoulos, Y., Leivadi, S. and
Yiannakis, A. (eds.) The sociology of tourism: Theoretical
and empirical investigations. London: Routledge, 193–218.
Weihrich, H. and Koontz, H. (1993) Management: A global
perspective. New York: McGraw- Hill. Wilson, L. and Boyle,
E. (2006) ‘Interorganisational collaboration at UK World
Heritage Sites’, Leadership and Organization Development
Journal, 27(6): 501–523. Winarni, G. (2006) ‘Kajian
Perubahan Ruang Kawasan World Heritage Candi Borobudur’
(‘Changes in space studies at the Borobudur World Heritage
Area’), unpublished Master’s thesis, University of Gajah
Mada.

15 ‘Mobile heritage’: motor vehicle
heritage tourism in the United Kingdom
Ashworth, G. J. (1991) Heritage planning, Groningen: Geo
Press.
Davies, L., Ramchandani, G. and Coleman, R. (2010)
‘Measuring attendance: Issues and implications for
estimating the impact of free- to-view sports events’,
International Journal of Sports Marketing and Sponsorship,
12(1): 11–23.
Frost, P., Hart, C., Kaminski, J., Smith, G. A. and Whyman,
J. (2011) The British historic vehicle movement – A £4
billion hobby, Stonewold: Federation of British Historic
Vehicle Clubs.
Frost, P., Hart, C., Smith, G. A. and Edmunds, I. (2009)
Maintaining our transport heritage, Stonewold: Federation
of British Historic Vehicle Clubs.
Kaminski, J., Smith, G. A., Frost, P. and Whyman, J.
(2013a) Economic impact of the Beaulieu International
Autojumble on the New Forest area, Stonewold: Federation of
British Historic Vehicle Clubs.
Kaminski, J., Smith, G. A., Frost, P. and Whyman, J.
(2013b) Economic impact of the Goodwood Revival meeting on
the immediate area, Stonewold: Federation of British
Historic Vehicle Clubs.
Montagu, E. D. (1990) The Brighton Run, Princes Risborough:
Shire Publications.
Munro, I. C. (1964) ‘A “Brighton” puzzle solved’, Veteran
Car, October, 77–8.
Smith, G. A., Kaminski, J. and Frost, P. (2011) Economic
impact of the London to Brighton Veteran Car Run on
Brighton and Hove, Stonewold: Federation of British
Historic Vehicle Clubs.

16 The value of intangible cultural
heritage: the case of the Fallas Festival
in Valencia, Spain
Arcodia, C. and Robb, A. (2000) ‘A future for event
management: A taxonomy of event management terms’, in J.
Allen, R. Harris, L. Jago and A. J. Veal (eds.) Events
beyond 2000: Setting the agenda, Proceedings of Conference
on Event Evaluation, Research and Education: 154–160,
Sydney: Australian Centre for Event Management. Bateman,
I., Carson, R., Day, B., Hanemann, M., Hanley, N., Hett,
T., Jones- Lee, M., Loomes, G., Mourato, S., Ózdemiroglu,
D. and Pearce, D. (2002) Economic valuation with stated
preference techniques, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. Butcher,
H. (1993) ‘Introduction: some examples and definitions’, in
H. Butcher, A. Glen, P. Henderson and J. Smith (eds.)
Community and public policy: 3–21, London: Pluto Press.
Costa, X. and Hernández, G.M. (1998) ‘The Offering of
Flowers to the Virgin in the Festival of the Fallas of
Valencia’, Social Knowledge: Heritage, Challenges,
Perspectives, XIV International Sociology Association
World Congress of Sociology, Montréal: ISA. Derrett, R.
(2000) ‘Can festivals brand community cultural development
and cultural tourism simultaneously?’, in J. Allen, R.
Harris, L. Jago and A. J. Veal (eds.) Events beyond 2000:
Setting the agenda, Proceedings of Conference on Event
Evaluation, Research and Education: 120–129, Sydney:
Australian Centre for Event Management, School of Leisure,
Sport and Tourism, University of Technology, Sydney.
Dimmock, K. and Tiyce, M. (2001) ‘Festivals and events:
celebrating special interest tourism’, in N. Douglas and
R. Derrett (eds.) Special interest tourism: 355–383,
Milton, Queensland: John Wiley and Sons, Australia.
European Union (1992) ‘Treaty on European Union’, article
128, signed on 7 February 1992, Official Journal of the
European Union, C 191/01, 35, 29 July 1992. Formica, S.
(1998) ‘The development of festivals and special events
studies’, Festival Management and Event Tourism, 5(3):
131–137. Getz, D. (1991) Festivals, special events and
tourism, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold. Hanley, N.,
Wright, R. E. and Adamowicz, W. (1998) ‘Using choice
experiments to value the environment: Design issues,
current experience and future prospects’, Environmental and
Resource Economics, 11(3–4): 413–428. Junta Central Fallera
(2012) Available online at www.fallas.com (last accessed 15
January 2013). Louviere, J. J., Hensher, D.A., Swait, J. D.
and Adamowicz, W. L. (2000) Stated choice methods:
Analysis and applications, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. McLoughlin, J., Kaminski, J. and Sodagar, B. (2007)
‘Assessing the socio- economic impact of heritage: From

theory to practice’, in J. McLoughlin, J. Kaminski and B.
Sodagar (eds.) Technology strategy, management and socioeconomic impact: Heritage Management Series Volume II,
Budapest: Archaeolingua, 17–42. Pathak, N. and Kothari, A.
(2003) ‘Community- conserved biodiverse areas: Lessons from
South Asia’, in D. Harmon and A. D. Putney (eds.) The full
value of parks: From economics to the intangible: 211–226,
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. Quinn, B. (2005) ‘Arts
festivals and the city’, Urban Studies, 42(5/6): 927–943.
Sánchez Royo, B. (2011) An approach towards holistic
assessment of socio- economic impacts, unpublished PhD
thesis, Valencia: University of Valencia. UNESCO (1972)
Convention concerning the protection of the world cultural
and natural heritage, adopted by the General Conference of
UNESCO on 16 November 1972, Paris: UNESCO. Entry into
force: 17 December 1975, in accordance with Article 33.
Accessed online in April 2013 at
http://whc.unesco.org/archive/convention en.pdf. UNESCO
(2003) Convention for the safeguarding of the intangible
cultural heritage, MISC/2003/CLT/CMISC/2003/CLT/CH/14,
Paris, 17 October 2003. Available online at
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001325/132540e.pdf.
UNESCO (2005) 30 frequently asked questions concerning the
convention on the protection and promotion of the diversity
of cultural expressions. Available online at http://
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001495/149502e.pdf (last
accessed June 2013).
Waterman, S. (1998) ‘Carnivals for elites? The cultural
politics of arts festivals’, Progress in Human Geography,
22(1): 54–75.
World Commission on Culture and Development (1996) Our
Creative Diversity, Paris: UNESCO, Office for Culture and
Development. Available at http://unesdoc.unesco.
org/images/0010/001055/105586Eb.pdf (last accessed 15
January 2013).

17 Cultural heritage tourism and the
digital future
Adami, A., Carlani, R., van Kampen, I., Pietroni, E. and
Sannibale M. (2012) ‘Digital techniques for Etruscan
Graves: the Etruscanning Project’, in Arnold, D., Kaminski,
J., Niccolucci, F. and Stork, A. (eds.) VAST (2012) 13th
International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology
and Cultural Heritage: 129–136, Goslar, Germany: The
Eurographics Association.
AICPM (n.d.) Database of cast collections, International
Association for the Conservation and the Promotion of
Plaster Cast Collections, accessed online (April 2013) at
www.plastercastcollection.org/en/database.php.
ATHENA (2008–11) Access to Cultural Heritage Networks
across Europe, accessed online (April 2013) at
www.athenaeurope.org. Berger, R. (1993) The Palace of the
Sun: The Louvre of Louis XIV, University Park, PA:
Pennsylvania State University Press. Boast, R. (2009) Open
Source Collections Management System, Museum3, accessed
online (April 2013) at
http://museum3.org/group/engaginginsocialmediainmuseums/
forum/topics/open- source-collections. British Museum
(2013) Life and Death: Pompeii and Herculaneum, accessed
online (April 2013) at
MINERVA- EC (2006) MINERVA EC Thematic Network in cultural,
scientific information and scholarly content, accessed
online (April 2013) at www.minervaeurope.org.
Morgan, R. (2009) Moving a major cultural institution onto
an Open Source WCM environment, presentation of
experiences from the V&A, accessed online (April 2013) at
www.slideshare.net/OpenSourceCMS/va- museum-migratingcontent-management- systems-open- source-cms.
Moscati, P, (ed.) (2007) ‘Virtual museums and archaeology:
The contribution of the Italian National Research
Council’, Archeologia e Calcolatori, Supplemento 1: 9–14.
Available online at soi.cnr.it/archcalc/images/VM.pdf.
Norsk Folkemuseum (The Norwegian Museum of Cultural
History) (n.d.) The Open Air Museum, accessed online
(April 2013) at www.norskfolkemuseum.no/en/exhibits/TheOpen-Air- Museum/.
Odense City Museums (n.d.) Funen village open- air museum,
accessed online (April 2013) at

museum.odense.dk/en/museums/funen- village.
Office of Travel and Tourism Industries (2010) Cultural
Heritage Traveler US. Department of Commerce International
Trade Administration, accessed online (April 2013) at
Palmer, R. and Richards, G. (2007) European Cultural
Capital Report, Arnhem: ATLAS.
Paradores (2013) World Heritage City Route, Paradores of
Spain Routes 2013, accessed online (April 2013) at
www.paradores- spain.com/offers/routes.html.
Sussex Sculptures Recording Project (2013) Sculpture
Trails, PMSA Regional Archive Centre for Sussex, accessed
online (April 2013) at www.publicsculpturesofsussex.co.
uk/sculpture- trails.
Taiwan National Palace Museum (2013) Carved olive- stone
boat, Ch’en Tsu- chang, Ch’ing Dynasty (1644–1911),
accessed online (April 2013) at www.npm.gov.tw/en/
Article.aspx?sNo=04001107.
V&A (n.d.) The Cast Court Collection, Victoria and Albert
Museum, accessed online (April 2013) at
www.vam.ac.uk/users/node/15151.
V&A (2012) How many items are there in the V&A
collections?, accessed online (April 2013) at
www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/s/size- of-the- v-anda-collections/.

18 Strategic planning for sustainability
and the effect of the recession at the
Roman Baths, Bath, UK
Cunliffe, B. W. (1969) Roman Bath, Oxford: Society of
Antiquaries Research Report No 24.
Cunliffe, B. W. (1988) The Temple of Sulis Minerva at Bath,
volume II: The finds from the sacred spring, Oxford:
Oxford University Committee for Archaeology Monograph No
16.
Cunliffe, B. W. and Davenport, P. A. (1985) The Temple of
Sulis Minerva at Bath, volume I: The site, Oxford: Oxford
University Committee for Archaeology Monograph No 7.
Dawson, P. (n.d.) ‘Economic impact of cultural activities
in Bath and North East Somerset’, unpublished Report for
Bath Cultural Forum and Bath Festivals, University of
Bath. Accessed online at
https://wikis.bris.ac.uk/download/attachments/55972470/
Erfurt- Cooper, P. and Cooper, M. (2009) Health and
wellness tourism: Spas and hot springs, Bristol: Channel
View Publications.
ETOA (2006) Olympic report, London: European Tour Operators
Association.
ETOA (2008) Olympics and tourism: Update on Olympic report
2006, London: European Tour Operators Association.
ETOA (2009) Beijing Olympic update, London: European Tour
Operators Association.
ETOA (2010) Olympic hotel demand, London: European Tour
Operators Association.
HBMCE (1987) World Heritage convention cultural properties:
UK nomination The City of Bath, London: Historic Buildings
and Monuments Commission for England.
South West Tourism Research (2008) Value of tourism 2008,
accessed online (April 2013) at
Stanton, W. I. (1991) ‘Hydrogeology of the hot springs of
Bath’, in Kellaway, G. A. (ed.) Hot springs of Bath:
Investigations of the thermal waters of the Avon Valley,
Bath: Bath City Council, 127–142.

UNWTO (2005) Tourism, microfinance and poverty alleviation,
Madrid: UNWTO.

19 Volunteering and cultural heritage
tourism: home and away
Atkinson, K. (2006) ‘Diggers – From paid peasants to eager
volunteers’, in Miller, K. E. (ed.) I volunteered for
this?! Life on an archaeological dig, Washington: Biblical
Archaeology Society, 10–17.
Bacon, E. (1971) Archaeology: Discoveries in the 1960s, New
York: Praeger.
Barkin, D. (2001) ‘Strengthening domestic tourism in
Mexico: Challenges and opportunities’, in Ghimire, K. (ed.)
The native tourist: Mass tourism within developing
countries, London: Earthscan, 30–54.
Basu, P. (2007) Highland home comings: Genealogy and
heritage tourism in the Scottish diaspora, London:
Routledge.
Benson, A. M. (2011) ‘Volunteer tourism: Theory and
practice’, in Benson, A. M. (ed.) Volunteer tourism:
Theoretical frameworks and practical applications,
Abingdon: Routledge, 1–6.
Benson, A. M. and Wearing, S. (2012) ‘Volunteer tourism:
Commodified trend or new phenomenon?’, in Moufakkir, O.
and Burns, P. M. (eds.) Controversies in tourism,
Wallingford: CABI, 242–254.
Brown, S. and Lehto, X. (2005) ‘Travelling with a purpose:
Understanding the motives and benefits of volunteer
vacationers’, Current Issues in Tourism, 8(6), 479–496.
Callanan, M. and Thomas, S. (2005) ‘Volunteer tourism –
deconstructing volunteer activities within a dynamic
environment’, in Novelli, M. (ed.) Niche tourism:
Contemporary issues, trends and cases, Oxford: Elsevier
Butterworth- Heinemann, 183–200.
CIRET (2012) Personal communication with Rene BaretjeKeller, President and Emeritus Member of the International
Academy for the Study of Tourism. Aix En Provence: Centre
International de Recherches et d’Etudes Touristiques,
www.ciret- tourism.com.
Coles, T. and Timothy, D. J. (2004) Tourism, diasporas and
space, London: Routledge.
Da Milano, C., Gibbs, K. and Sani, M. (2009) Volunteers in

museums and cultural heritage: A European handbook,
Ljubljana: Slovenian Museum Association.
Davis Smith, J. (2012) Chief Executive of Volunteering
England. ‘2012 could be the year of the volunteer – but
investment is key’, Volunteering England, 20 April.
Retrieved from www.volunteering.org.uk/aboutus/newsreleases/2275-2012.
Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG).
(2010) Citizenship survey, 2009–2010 England, London:
DCLG.
Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG).
(2011) Citizenship Survey, 2010–2011 England, London:
DCLG.
Diaspora Volunteering Alliance (2013) ‘What we do: Diaspora
volunteering’, Diaspora Volunteering Alliance. Available
at www.diasporavolunteeringalliance.org/what- we-do.
Edwards, D. (2004) ‘Defining field characteristics of
museums and art museums: An Australian perspective’, in
Stebbins, R. A. and Graham, M. M. (eds.) Volunteering as
leisure/leisure as volunteering, Wallingford: CABI,
137–150.
Edwards, D. C. (2005) ‘It’s mostly about me: Reasons why
volunteers contribute their time to museums and art
museums’, Tourism Review International, 9: 1–11.
Edwards, D. and Graham, M. (2006) ‘Museum volunteers: A
discussion of challenges facing managers in the cultural
and heritage sectors’, Australian Journal of Volunteering,
11: 19–27.
English Heritage (2012) Annual reports and accounts
2011–2012, HC 266, London: The Stationery Office.
Erb, M. (2003) ‘ “Uniting the bodies and cleansing the
village”: conflicts over local heritage in a globalizing
world’, Indonesia and the Malay World, 31: 129–139.
European Commission (2007) ‘European social reality
report’, Special Eurobarometer 273. European Year of
Volunteering (EYV) 2011 Alliance (2011) Policy agenda for
volunteering in Europe, P.A.V.E.: Working towards a true
legacy for EYV 2011, Brussels: EYV 2011 Alliance. Graham,
M. (2000) ‘The professionalisation of museum volunteers: An
ethical dilemma’, in McNamee, M., Jennings, C. and Reeves,
M. (eds.) Just leisure: Policy, ethics and

professionalism, Eastbourne: LSA, 185–210. Graham, M.
(2001) ‘The role of museum volunteering in relieving social
isolation’, in Graham, M. and Foley, M. (eds.) Leisure
volunteering: Marginal or inclusive?, Eastbourne: LSA
Publication, 75: 57–75. Henderson, K. A. (1981)
‘Motivations and perceptions of volunteerism as a leisure
activity’, Journal of Leisure Research, 13: 208–218.
Heritage Lottery Fund (HLF ). (2010) ‘Assessment of the
social impact of volunteering HLF- funded projects: Yr 2.
Final Report: August 2010’, London: HLF and BOP Consulting.
Heritage Lottery Fund (HLF ). (2011) ‘Assessment of the
social impact of volunteering in HLF- funded projects: Yr
3. Final Report: September 2011’, London: HLF and BOP
Consulting. Holmes, K. (1999) ‘Changing times: Volunteering
in the heritage sector 1984–1998’, Voluntary Action, 1(2):
21–35. Holmes, K. (2001) ‘The motivation and retention of
front- of-house volunteers at museums and heritage
attractions’, in Graham, M. and Foley, M. (eds.) Leisure
volunteering: Marginal or inclusive?, Eastbourne: LSA
Publication, 75: 95–109. Holmes, K. and Edwards, D. (2008)
‘Volunteers as hosts and guests in museums’, in Lyons, K.
D. and Wearing, S. (eds.) Journeys of discovery in
volunteer tourism, Wallingford: CABI, 155–165. Howlett, S.
Machin, J. and Malmersjo, G. (2005) Volunteering in
museums, libraries and archives, London: Institute for
Volunteering Research. Jackson, S. (2011) ‘Profiling
volunteer holiday leaders: A case study of National Trust
working holiday leaders – socio- demographics, basic human
values and functional volunteer motivations’, in Benson, A.
M. (ed.) Volunteer tourism: Theory framework to practical
applications, Abingdon: Routledge, 135–156. Jameson, J. H.
(2003) ‘Purveyors of the past: Education and outreach as
ethical imperatives in archaeology’, in Zimmerman, L. J.,
Vitelli, K. D. and Hollowell, J. (eds.) Ethical issues in
archaeology, Walnut Creek: Altamira Press, 153–162.
Kaminski, J., Arnold, D. B. and Benson, A. M. (2010)
‘Volunteer archaeological tourism’, in Benson, A. M. (ed.)
Volunteer tourism: Theory framework to practical
applications, Abingdon: Routledge, 157–174. Kelner, S.
(2010) Tours that bind: Diaspora, pilgrimage, and Israeli
birthright tourism, New York: New York University Press.
Kenoyer, J. M. (2008) ‘Collaborative archaeological
research in Pakistan and India: Patterns and processes’,
The SAA Archaeological Record, 8(3): 12–22. McGehee, N. and
Santos, C. (2005) ‘Social change, discourse, and volunteer
tourism’, Annals of Tourism Research, 32(3): 760–779.
McCloskey, E. (2003) Archaeo- volunteers: The world guide
to archaeological and heritage volunteering, Milan: Green
Volunteers. McIvor, S. and Goodlad, S. (1998) Museum
volunteers: Good practice in the management of volunteers,

London: Routledge.
Mintel (2008) Volunteer tourism: International – September
2008, London: Mintel.
National Trust (NT) (2012) Going local: National Trust
annual report 2011–2012, Swindon: National Trust.
Newland, K. (2011) Diaspora tourism, Migration Policy
Institute, Washington DC, for Diaspora Matters, Dublin,
Ireland: Impress Printing Works.
Newland, K. and Taylor, C. (2010) Heritage tourism and
nostalgia trade: A diaspora niche in the development
landscape, Washington DC: Migration Policy Institute.
Oomen, J. and Aroyo, L. (2010) ‘Crowdsourcing in the
cultural heritage domain: Opportunities and challenges’,
C&T’11: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on
Communities and Technologies, 138–149.
Orr, N. (2006) ‘Museum volunteering: Heritage as “serious
leisure” ’, International Journal of Heritage Studies,
12(2): 194–210.
Osborn, J. A. (1994) ‘Engaging the public’, CRM, 17(6): 15.
Osborn, J. A. and Peters, G. (1991) ‘Passport in time’,
Federal Archaeology Report, 4: 1–6.
Rosen, E. E. (2006) ‘The volunteer’s contribution to
archaeology and vice versa’, in Miller, K. E. (ed.) I
volunteered for this?! Life on an archaeological dig,
Washington: Biblical Archaeology Society, 18–20.
Scheyvens, R. (2007) ‘Poor cousins no more: Valuing the
development potential of domestic and diaspora tourism’,
Progress in Development Studies, 7(4): 307–325.
Stebbins, R. A. (1992) Amateurs, professionals and serious
leisure, Montreal and Kingston: McGill- Queen’s University
Press.
Stebbins, R. A. (1996) ‘Volunteering: A serious leisure
perspective’, Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 25:
211–224.
Stebbins, R. A. (2004) ‘Introduction’, in Stebbins, R. A.
and Graham, M. M. (eds.) Volunteering as leisure/leisure as
volunteering, Wallingford: CABI, 1–12.

Stebbins, R. A. (2007) Serious leisure: A perspective for
our time, New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.
Stebbins, R. A. and Graham, M. M. (2004) Volunteering as
leisure/leisure as volunteering, Wallingford: CABI.
Terrazas, A. (2010) Connected through service: Diaspora
volunteers and global development, Washington, DC:
Migration Policy Institute.
Timothy, D. J. (2011) Cultural heritage and tourism: An
introduction, Bristol: Channel View Publications.
Tourism Research and Marketing (TRAM) (2008) Volunteer
tourism: A global analysis, Arnhem: ATLAS Publications.
United Nations Volunteers (UNV). (2011) State of the
world’s volunteerism report: Universal values for global
well- being, Bonn: UNV Publication.
Volunteering Australia (2011) The latest picture of
volunteering in Australia. Available at
www.volunteeringaustralia.org/VolunteeringFacts/-Statistics/-The- latest-picture- ofvolunteeringin-Australia- 2011.asp.
Wearing, S. L. (2001) Volunteer tourism: Experiences that
make a difference, New York: CABI.
World Heritage Volunteer Website and Reports (2008, 2009,
2010, 2011, 2012) Available at
http://whc.unesco.org/en/activities/574/.
Yadin, Y. (1966) Masada: Herod’s fortress and the Zealot’s
last stand, New York: Random House.

20 Cultural heritage tourism: future
drivers and their influence
ACIA (2005) Arctic climate impact assessment, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Anon. (2011) ‘In Syria, death of tourism most visible sign
of major economic damage’, The Washington Post, June 8.
Anon. (2013a) ‘Local authority funding fell by £23m in
2011–12’, Museums Journal, 113(1): 5.
Anon. (2013b) ‘Proportion of adults visiting museums hits
all- time high’, Museums Journal, 113(1): 15.
Anon. (2013c) ‘National redundancies top 400 mark since
2010’, Museums Journal, 113(3): 7.
Anon. (2013d) ‘A building boom in China’, The New York
Times, March 21.
Armaly, M., Blasi, C. and Hannah, L. (2004) ‘Stari Most:
Rebuilding more than a historic bridge in Mostar’, Museum
International, 56(224): 6–17. Bailey, M. (2006)
‘Antiquities are the most precious thing in Iraq, not oil.
They represent the memory of the Iraqi people’, The Art
Newspaper, 15(175): 8–9. Baker, R. W., Ismael, S. T. and
Ismael, T. Y. (eds.) (2010) Cultural cleansing in Iraq:
Why museums were looted, libraries burned and academics
murdered, London: Pluto Press. BBC News Channel (2007)
Attack on giant Pakistan Buddha, September 12, accessed
(April 2013) at http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/6991058.stm.
Bevan, R. (2006) The destruction of memory: Architecture at
war, London: Reaktion Books. Bodganos, M. (2006)
‘Casualties of war: The looting of the Iraq museum’, Museum
News, 85(2): 34–44. Breitkopf, S. (2007) ‘Lost: the looting
of Iraq’s antiquities’, Museum News, 86(1): 44–51.
Bromwich, D. H., Nicolas, J. P., Monaghan, A. J., Lazzara,
M. A., Keller, L. M., Weidner, G. A. and Wilson, A. B.
(2012) ‘Central West Antarctica among the most rapidly
warming regions on Earth’, Nature Geoscience, 6(2):
139–145. Clément, E. (1992) ‘Some recent practical
experience in the implementation of the 1954 Hague
Convention’, International Journal of Cultural Property,
11: 11–25. Cunliffe, E. (2012) Damage to the soul: Syria’s
cultural heritage in conflict, Palo Alto: Global Heritage
Fund, available at
IEA (2012) Energy technology perspectives 2012: Pathways to
a clean energy system, Paris: The International Energy

Agency.
IOM (2011) World migration report 2011: Communicating
effectively about migration, Geneva: International
Organization for Migration.
Jopson, D. (2013) ‘Australian uranium discovery threatens
ancient indigenous cave art’, The Guardian, March 8.
Kendall, G. (2012) ‘Slash and burn’, Museums Journal,
112(11): 24–28.
Koers, W., van der Giessen, A., van Weelden, M. and Becker,
J. (2012) Future of cultural heritage: Impact of external
developments, Background paper to the 18 December 2012
European Policy Workshop, Brussels, available online at
http://ec.europa.eu/ research/social- sciences/pdf/events228/efp- cultural-heritage- background-paper_en. pdf
(accessed February 28, 2012).
Libicki, M. C., Shatz, H. J. and Taylor, J. E. (2011)
Global demographic change and its implications for
military power, Santa Monica: RAND Corporation.
Lloyds (2012) Arctic opening: Opportunity and risk in the
high north, London: Lloyds.
Manhart, C. (2001) ‘The Afghan cultural heritage crisis:
UNESCO’s response to the destruction of statues in
Afghanistan’, American Journal of Archaeology, 105:
387–388.
MAPS (2007) Moscow heritage at crisis point (second
edition), Moscow: Moscow Architecture Preservation Society.
McConnell, F. (2013) ‘Afghanistan’s heritage is at stake’,
The Independent, March 17.
MOD (2010) Global strategic trends: Out to 2040,
Shrivenham: Ministry of Defence.
Moscardo, G. (2006) ‘Third- age tourism’, in Buhalis, D.
and Costa, C. (eds.) Tourism business frontiers:
Consumers, products and industry, Oxford: Elsevier, 30–39.
Musharbash, Y. (2007) ‘The “Talibanization” of Pakistan:
Islamists destroy Buddhist statue’, Spiegel Online,
accessed (April 2013) at
www.spiegel.de/international/world/ the- talibanization-ofpakistan-islamists- destroy-buddhist- statue-a-

515958.html.
National Trust (2012) Going local: National Trust annual
report 2011/12, London: National Trust.
Nederlands Bureau voor Toerisme (1988) Waarom komen
Buitenlanders voor vakantie naar Nederland?, Leidschendam:
NBT.
Nemeth, E. (2013) ‘Alternative power: Political economy of
cultural property’, Journal of International Affairs,
available online at
www.rand.org/pubs/external_publications/ EP51306.html
(accessed February 28, 2012).
NIC (2012) Global trends 2030: Alternative worlds,
Washington: National Intelligence Council.
NRC (2011) Climate stabilization targets: Emissions,
concentrations, and impacts over decades to millennia,
Washington: National Academies Press.
Papatheodorou, A., Rosselló, J. and Xiao, H. (2010) ‘Global
economic crisis and tourism: Consequences and
perspectives’, Journal of Travel Research, 49(1): 39–45.
Rhisiart, M. and While, G. (2008) The future of the arts
and culture in Wales within a global context: Trends,
drivers of change and new paradigms, Arts Council of Wales,
available online at www.artscouncilofwales.org.uk/whatwe-do/research/latest- research/the- futures-study
(accessed January 12, 2013).
Rodwell, D. (2004) ‘Dubrovnik: Pearl of the Adriatic’,
World Heritage, 38: 68–79.
Schuster, J. M. D. (1993) ‘The public interest in the art
museum’s public’, in Gubbels, T. and van Hemel, A. (eds.)
Art museums and the price of success: An international
comparison, Amsterdam: Boekmanstichting, 45–60.
Senatore, M. X. and Zarankin, A. (2012) ‘Tourism and the
invisible historic sites in Antarctica’, Proceedings of
the ICOMOS General Assembly Scientific Symposium, Part
III: Session Development as Tourism, 592–601, Paris:
ICOMOS. Stone, P. G. and Bajjaly J. F. (eds.) (2008) The
destruction of cultural heritage in Iraq, Woodbridge:
Boydell Press. Stonehouse, B. and Snyder, J. M. (2010)
Polar tourism: An environmental perspective, Bristol:
Channel View Publications. Talley, M. K. (1995) ‘The old

road and the mind’s internal heaven: Preservation of the
cultural heritage in times of armed conflict’, Museum
Management and Curatorship, 14(1): 57–64. Turner, J.,
Colwell, S. R., Marshall, G. J., Lachlan- Cope, T. A.,
Carleton, A. M., Jones, P. D., Lagun, V., Reid, P. A. and
Iagovkina, S. (2005) ‘Antarctic climate change during the
last 50 years’, International Journal of Climatology, 25:
279–294. UNDP (2005) Human development report 2005:
International cooperation at a crossroads – aid, trade and
security in an unequal world, New York: United Nations
Development Programme. UNESCO (2006) Predicting and
managing the effects of climate change on world heritage,
Vilnius: UNESCO. UNFPA (2011) State of world population
2011, New York: United Nations Population Fund. United
Nations (2012) ‘Population ageing and development: Ten
years after Madrid’, Population Facts, 2012/4: 1–4. UNWTO
(2009) UNWTO World Tourism Barometer, 7(2), June. UNWTO
(2013) UNWTO World Tourism Barometer, 11(1), January. Ward,
K. (2011) The world in 2050: Quantifying the shift in the
global economy, London: HSBC. Ward, K. (2012) The world in
2050: From the top 30 to the top 100, London: HSBC.
Wegener, C. and Otter, M. (2008) ‘Cultural property at war:
Protecting heritage during armed conflict’, Conservation:
The Getty Conservation Institute newsletter, 23(1): 4–9.
Xu, J. and Le Guay, O. (2013) Behind the China museum
fever, available online at www. forumavignon.org/en/behind- china-museum- fever (accessed March
21, 2013). Zhao, C. (2004) ‘From Shikumen to new- style: A
rereading of lilong housing in modern Shanghai’, The
Journal of Architecture, 9(1): 49–76.

