Journal of Tourism and Cultural Change

ISSN: 1476-6825 (Print) 1747-7654 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtcc20

Developing a typology of tourist harassment in
archeological sites: a netnographic approach
Zaid Alrawadieh & Ziad Alrawadieh
To cite this article: Zaid Alrawadieh & Ziad Alrawadieh (2019): Developing a typology of tourist
harassment in archeological sites: a netnographic approach, Journal of Tourism and Cultural
Change, DOI: 10.1080/14766825.2019.1579825
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/14766825.2019.1579825

Published online: 14 Feb 2019.

Submit your article to this journal

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rtcc20

JOURNAL OF TOURISM AND CULTURAL CHANGE
https://doi.org/10.1080/14766825.2019.1579825

Developing a typology of tourist harassment in archeological
sites: a netnographic approach
Zaid Alrawadieh
a

a

and Ziad Alrawadieh

b

Department of Hotel, Restaurant and Catering Services, Istanbul University Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey;
School of Archaeology and Tourism, University of Jordan, Amman, Jordan

b

ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

Tourist harassment has received some attention over the past two
decades as a major challenge aﬀecting travelers’ personal safety
and their perceptions of tourism destinations. However, there is
still a need to understand and explore in depth the types of
behavior that constitute tourist harassment. Using a qualitative
netnographic study approach, this study identiﬁed the types of
harassment that tourists are likely to experience in archeological
sites. Travelers’ anecdotes reporting harassment incidents in two
Jordanian archeological sites, Petra and Jerash, were retrieved
from TripAdvisor and examined using a hybrid content analysis
approach. Six key categories of tourist harassment emerged from
the data. These categories were labeled as vendors’ persistence,
obtrusive on-site service providers, beggar children, sexual
harassment, verbal abuse, and physical abuse. Each category was
explored in depth and exempliﬁed using travelers’ anecdotes. A
typology of tourists’ response to harassment was also developed
based on the anecdotes. Results suggest that vendors’ persistence
was the most frequently reported type of harassment. When
experiencing harassment, tourists are likely to respond by
resisting the harassers. The ﬁndings have several theoretical and
managerial implications for both researchers and destination
managers.

Received 17 February 2018
Accepted 1 February 2019
KEYWORDS

Tourist harassment; tourist
safety; tourist complaints;
netnography; archeological
sites; Jordan

Introduction
The importance of the interpersonal relationship between tourists and host communities
is widely acknowledged (Alrawadieh & Alrawadieh, 2018; Carneiro, Eusébio, & Caldeira,
2018; Cetin & Bilgihan, 2016; Decrop, Chiappa, Mallargé, & Zidda, 2018; Eusébio, Vieira,
& Lima, 2018). In particular, social interaction between hosts and guests is deemed an
essential component of the tourist experience in destinations (Cetin & Bilgihan, 2016).
While Destination Management Organizations (DMOs) strive to create and enhance positive tourist experiences, in certain cases, dissatisfaction stemming from the host-guest
interaction may be inevitable. In particular, tourist harassment by locals can be a major dissatisﬁer particularly in developing economies (Kozak, 2002; McElroy, Tarlow, & Carlisle,
2007). Subsequent to the seminal work of de Albuquerque and McElroy (2001), tourist
CONTACT Zaid Alrawadieh
zaid.alrawadieh@istanbul.edu.tr
vices, Istanbul University Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, 34265 Turkey
© 2019 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

Department of Hotel, Restaurant and Catering Ser-

2

Z. ALRAWADIEH AND Z. ALRAWADIEH

harassment has received some attention from scholars in the tourism realm. However,
despite its importance as a broadening challenge, literature on tourist harassment is still
scant.
Previous studies tackling the issue of tourist harassment indicate that this problem is
not as marginal as one may assume. For instance, de Albuquerque and McElroy (2001)
reported that 59 percent of tourists in Barbados experienced harassment. Similarly,
Kozak (2007) suggested that about half of the British tourists visiting Marmaris, Turkey
were victims of harassment. More than 58 percent of tourists approached in Skipper’s
(2009) study reported having experienced harassment from the locals while on vacation.
It may be plausible to assume that the issue of tourist harassment is more evident in developing countries. For instance, Kozak (2002), suggested that while tourist harassment was a
major problem in Mugla (Turkey), no complaint was registered in Mallorca (Spain), concluding that tourist harassment was more likely to be common in destinations where
tourism development was still immature. However, as noted by McElroy et al. (2007, p.
306), ‘harassment is one of the most pervasive and least studied problems aﬀecting destinations across the globe’. While the topic has been the focus of a number of studies, the
types of behavior that involve tourist harassment remain unclear in the existing literature.
Speciﬁcally, except for one study by Nicely and Ghazali (2014), travelers’ narratives
shared online have not been harnessed to understand the types of harassment that travelers may experience while on vacation. With these thoughts in mind, the present study
endeavors to contribute to the limited research on tourist harassment by widening our
understanding of the types of tourist harassment in archeological sites. The study also provides insights into how tourists respond to harassment.
The tension and instability in the Middle East region have negatively inﬂuenced the
tourism industry in Jordan. This is clearly reﬂected in the recent statistical ﬁgures. While
Jordan attracted more than 8 million tourists in 2010 (MoTA, 2011), the number of arrivals
has dropped signiﬁcantly over the years registering only about 4.6 million in 2017 (MoTA,
2017). While Jordan enjoys a good reputation for the richness of its cultural heritage sites
as well as the hospitality of its people, as it is usually the case with some maturing destinations, tourist harassment may be of some concern. As will be revealed through this
study, diﬀerent forms of harassment toward foreign tourists in Jordan do exist. The contribution of the present study lies in its attempt to shed light on the vexing issue of
tourist harassment by developing a typology of tourist harassment in archeological sites
using a netnographic study approach. The ﬁndings may be of signiﬁcant importance as
they can help DMOs gain better understanding of the types of harassment reported by
international tourists. The study also suggests policies and strategies to help tourism policymakers curb harassment incidents.

Literature review
From a marketing perspective, tourism and travel are unique services that usually require
high involvement in terms of time and ﬁnancial outlay (Roehl & Fesenmaier, 1992). Travelers are keen on having exceptional experiences in the destinations they visit to make it
worth their time and money. Given the complex and intercorrelated nature of tourism, travelers’ experiences are not only dependent on services and products in the host destinations (e.g. hotels, food) but also on the interpersonal interaction with the locals

JOURNAL OF TOURISM AND CULTURAL CHANGE

3

(Karayilan & Cetin, 2016). The host-guest interaction is generally and justiﬁably viewed as a
positive feature of the tourism industry. This interaction allows tourists to become
acquainted with a new culture all the while enhancing their sense of novelty as a part
of their holistic tourist experience. At the same time, locals beneﬁt from this interaction
in diﬀerent ways mainly by gaining economic outcomes. This mutually good relationship
can be damaged, however, by inappropriate behavior on the part of either locals or tourists (Weaver, 1995). In this respect, and for the purpose of the present study, ‘any annoying
behavior which is carried to extreme’ by locals against tourists is referred to as tourist harassment (de Albuquerque & McElroy, 2001, p. 478). This issue seems to be common in
several destinations such as Turkey, Jamaica, and China (Ajagunna, 2006; Dunn & Dunn,
2002; Korzay & Alvarez, 2005; Kozak, 2016; Qiao, Chen, & Prideaux, 2017).
Tourist harassment is arguably one of the main challenges that face tourism development in several destinations over the globe (Weaver, 1995). In fact, harassment incidents
have negative impacts on tourists’ satisfaction and tourists’ intentions to revisit a destination (Baloglu, Henthorne, & Sahin, 2014; Henthorne, George, & Smith, 2013; Kozak, 2007).
The image and reputation of a destination are also threatened by the incidents of tourist
harassment (Ajagunna, 2006; Baloglu et al., 2014). Traditionally, incidents targeting foreign
tourists have been heavily covered by the media leading to adverse impacts on the
tourism industry in the destination where the incidents occurred (Pizam, Tarlow, &
Bloom, 1997). The negative perceptions with respect to safety arguably reduce visitors’
enjoyment since they will avoid certain activities which eventually results in limited
tourism revenues in the relevant destinations (Walker & Page, 2007). In addition, travelers
are more likely to develop hostility toward those destinations in which they experienced
severe incidents, particularly when little eﬀort is made by the local agencies to protect
them (Breitsohl & Garrod, 2016).
Personal safety is a major concern for travelers. Literature indicates that tourists are
usually considered to be lucrative targets because they are easily distinguished, may
carry expensive portable items, are unfamiliar with the destination and the local language,
and have no social support within the host community (Holcomb & Pizam, 2006; Pizam
et al., 1997). Given the importance of ensuring safety to international travelers, foreign
tourists enjoy preferential treatment in several destinations. For instance, in many destinations around the globe, special tourist police forces are entrusted with the sole responsibility of ensuring the safety of foreign tourists (Pizam et al., 1997). As noted by several
scholars (e.g. McElroy et al., 2007; Ryan, 1993), foreign tourists are less likely to report
the criminal incidents they experience while on vacation. Reasons include their unwillingness to lose quality time and to pay the extra costs associated with the process (e.g. travelling back to the destination to follow the judicial procedures). At the same time, while
foreign tourists may be badgered by behaviors that are viewed as tourist harassment,
there seems to be much ambiguity on which behaviors constitute crimes and which do
not. For instance, while begging is widely accepted as a common type of tourist harassment, it is not illegal in such countries as Finland, France, and Thailand (Qiao et al., 2017).
Past studies have outlined several types of harassment that tourists are likely to experience in the host destinations (Table 1). Depending on the local laws in a given destination,
some of these types are considered as crimes, while others are not. Persistence of vendors,
begging, verbal or physical abuse, and sexual harassment seem to be common types of
tourist harassment. McElroy et al. (2007) proposed a less common type of tourist

4

Z. ALRAWADIEH AND Z. ALRAWADIEH

Table 1. Typology of tourist harassment outlined in previous studies.
Author(s)

Year

Identiﬁed/examined typologies

Alrawadieh et al.

2018

Qiao et al.

2017

Badu-Baiden et al.

2016

Nicely and Ghazali

2014

Chepkwony and
Kangogo

2013

Skipper

2009

Kozak

2007

de Albuquerque and
McElroy

2001

Weaver

1995

Vendors’ persistence
Children beggars
Sexual harassment
Harassment by beggars
Fraud
Sexual harassment
Physical attack
Larceny
Illegal search/detention/ extortion
Robbery
Verbal abuse
Unruly behavior
Aggressive action
Sexual abuse
A total of 26 harassment behaviors were identiﬁed; all occurring during the trading
process. The top 3 selling behaviors were: traders surrounding tourists at once, calling
to them at the same time, and hurling abusive or intimidating language at them
when purchase was declined.
Pestering to buy goods and services
Begging
Sexual harassment
Interference with privacy and freedom of movement
Drug peddling
Verbal abuse
Vending
Peddling of drugs
Physical abuse
Begging
Soliciting of sex
Verbal abuse
Persistence of vendors
Sexual harassment
Verbal abuse
Physical abuse
Peddling of drugs
Persistence of vendors without uniforms
Peddling of drugs
Verbal abuse
Sexual harassment
Physical abuse
Beggars
Locals persistently oﬀering guiding services

harassment, that is macro or institutional harassment by government oﬃcials and border
personnel. Harassment by certain religious groups (e.g. Rastafarians in Jamaica) has also
been mentioned in the literature (Ajagunna, 2006; McElroy et al., 2007). Several studies
suggest that persistence of vendors was the most common type of tourist harassment
(Alrawadieh, Alrawadieh, & Kozak, 2019; Badu-Baiden, Adu-Boahen, & Otoo, 2016; de Albuquerque & McElroy, 2001; Kozak, 2007; Skipper, 2009). In this vein, Nicely and Ghazali
(2014) viewed tourist harassment as a combination of two key components: local
sellers’ behavior and the visitor’s emotional response to that behavior. Yet Some forms
of tourist harassment are intercorrelated; for instance, vendors may verbally abuse
foreign tourists when they fail to convince them to buy (de Albuquerque & McElroy, 2001).
The demographic proﬁle of tourists, as well as their travel patterns, were found to be
associated to the likelihood of their experiencing tourist harassment. While female

JOURNAL OF TOURISM AND CULTURAL CHANGE

5

travelers are more likely to be harassed (Skipper, 2009), male travelers are more likely to
resist harassment (Badu-Baiden et al., 2016). By contrast, Kozak (2007) noted that the likelihood of experiencing harassment did not diﬀer based on the gender of the harassed.
Qiao et al. (2017) claimed that Western travelers were more likely to experience harassment. While some studies found that younger tourists were more likely to be targeted
than older tourists (de Albuquerque & McElroy, 2001), others reported diﬀerent results
(Qiao et al., 2017). The likelihood of tourist harassment taking place according to
whether tourists are traveling alone or in groups of two or more was also treated in
past studies. Skipper (2009) noted that 88 percent of travelers were harassed while part
of a couple or in a group. Compared to repeaters, ﬁrst-time visitors are more likely to
experience tourist harassment (Chepkwony & Kangogo, 2013; de Albuquerque &
McElroy, 2001; Skipper, 2009). However, repeaters are more likely to return to the destination after a harassment experience than ﬁrst-time visitors (Nicely & Armadita, 2017).
Tourists react to harassment in diﬀerent ways depending on such factors as the severity
of the harassment act and the demographic proﬁle of the harassed. Kozak (2007) found
that tourists generally resisted harassment. However, targeted tourists also proposed
that legal actions should be taken against perpetrators. Skipper (2009) stated that tourists’
responses to harassment included saying ‘no thank you’, walking away, and ignoring the
harasser. Badu-Baiden et al. (2016) found that tourists’ responses to harassment varied
based on what form of harassment was experienced and suggested that their resistance
increased as the forms of harassment got more physical. Üngüren, Arslan, and Kaçmaz
(2015) proposed that some travelers may tolerate harassment from shopkeepers
because they associate these behaviors with the local culture and they understand that
such behaviors are the shopkeepers’ way of doing business.
Following the pioneering work of de Albuquerque and McElroy (2001), research endeavors on tourist harassment have depended on structured methods using surveys. While
those studies provided important insights into the vexing problem of harassment in
tourist destinations, they failed to explore in depth the typology of behaviours that can
be described as harassment. The present study is, therefore, an attempt to ﬁll this gap
by developing a typology of tourist harassment in archeological sites using a non-traditional method. As noted by Xiang, Schwartz, Gerdes, and Uysal (2015), with the rich
and easily accessible data disseminated online, researchers now have the opportunity
to gain a better understanding of several issues that were traditionally examined only
through conventional research techniques. In addition, typologies outlined in previous
research were not supported with examples. By adopting a netnographic approach, the
present study clariﬁed each identiﬁed type of harassment by giving authentic examples
from the travelers’ own experiences as narrated in their anecdotes.

Methodology
Data collection
The current study used a qualitative netnographic study approach to develop a typology
of tourist harassment in archeological sites. Netnography is a novel research method that
adopts ethnography on online communities (Kozinets, 2002). Netnography can simply be
described as online ethnography (Kozinets, 2007). This method has proven to be useful in

6

Z. ALRAWADIEH AND Z. ALRAWADIEH

revealing customers’ experiences in tourism and hospitality (Gursoy, Cai, & Anaya, 2017;
Wu & Pearce, 2014). Unlike the traditional ethnography, netnography is found to be unobtrusive, more convenient, and less expensive (Kozinets, 2002). To gain more accurate and
detailed insights into the issue of tourist harassment, netnography was chosen as appropriate method for the present study.
For the purpose of this study, travelers’ anecdotes about harassment incidents in two
Jordanian key archeological sites, Petra and Jerash, were examined. These anecdotes
were retrieved from the following TripAdvisor pages: ‘Petra World Heritage Site’, ‘The
Treasury (al-Khazna)’, ‘Monastery (Al Dayr)’, ‘Siq’, and ‘Jerash Ruins’. TripAdvisor was
used because it is a popular travel website that has a large inventory of anecdotes
helpful for understanding tourist behavior and tourist experiences. The above-mentioned
pages were particularly selected since they contained the largest quantity of anecdotes
providing detailed and rich data relevant to the research topic. These criteria are particularly important when identifying suitable online communities in netnography research
(Kozinets, 2002). To limit the scope of the study to archeological sites, Petra and Jerash
were selected. These two sites are regarded as being the most important archeological
sites in Jordan. Petra is United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) World Heritage Site since 1985 while Jerash is one of the world’s still well-preserved Roman cities. Recent ﬁgures suggest that approximately 19 percent of tourists to
Jordan have visited Petra and Jerash (MoTA, 2017). To identify anecdotes related to
tourist harassment, keywords such as ‘harassment’, ‘hassle’, ‘hustle’, ‘disturb’, ‘aggressive’,
‘peddlers’ and ‘vendors’ were used. The criteria set for selection were that the anecdotes
should be written in English, should date from no more than 3 years before (the data was
collected in mid-October 2017), and should be negative in nature. The last criterion is particularly important since in some cases harassment may be viewed as a part of the tourist
experience (Alrawadieh et al., 2019; Alrawadieh, Dincer, Dincer, & Mammadova, 2018). For
instance, one anecdote that was excluded from the analysis stated: ‘the local Bedouin
hawkers will hassle you to buy something, but it all adds to the experience, and most
are very friendly’. In this sense, the data collection adopted a purposive sampling technique where only anecdotes that served the study’s goal were selected. A total of 121
anecdotes were identiﬁed as being appropriate for this study.
Demographic proﬁles of the travelers who reported incidents of harassment, as well as
their overall satisfaction rate, were also collected. When data were totally or partially
missing from the informants’ TripAdvisor proﬁles, the informants were contacted and
asked to provide the missing data after explaining the research objectives. About onethird of those who were contacted responded providing the missing data. Interestingly,
not only did some of them provide the missing data, but they also elaborated on the
issue, oﬀering suggestions to minimize tourist harassment incidents. This may indicate travelers’ enthusiasm to help research endeavors that look into issues related to their tourist
experiences.

Data analysis
Anecdotes that reported harassment incidents were identiﬁed and saved into a Word
document for further analysis. Given the reasonable size of the dataset in the present
study (121 anecdotes), manual coding was deemed appropriate. The manual coding

JOURNAL OF TOURISM AND CULTURAL CHANGE

7

may be regarded as being helpful in reaching better understanding of the tourist experiences in narratives. A hybrid content analysis approach was employed (Dinçer & Alrawadieh, 2017). Initially, the analysis adopted an inductive approach. The anecdotes were
carefully read several times to for familiarity with the data. After that, common themes
and patterns were extracted inductively from the data. Following this stage, broader categories were identiﬁed and labeled based on the original data (inductive) as well as the
existing literature (deductive) (see Table 1). This approach provided a richer understanding
of the harassment phenomenon and led to the development of new themes. For instance,
while previous research tended to refer to vendors in general (e.g. shopkeepers, hawkers)
as a source of harassment, our analysis identiﬁed a new category labeled as obtrusive onsite service providers and a distinction was made between vendors’ persistence and on-site
service providers’ obtrusiveness as two key harassment behaviors. The authors read and
coded the qualitative data independently, discussed their ﬁndings several times, and
agreed on the ﬁnal framework presented in the present study. To enhance the reliability
of the analysis, a reasonable amount of direct quotations from the travelers’ anecdotes
were reported. Moreover, to enhance the discussion and gain additional insights into
the topic, informal interviews were conducted with several tourism experts (3 oﬃcial
tour guides, 2 tourism academicians, 2 oﬃcials in governmental DMOs, and 1 hotel
manager). The identiﬁed typology was shared with them and they were consulted
about relevant issues including means to curb the issue of tourist harassment.

Findings and discussion
Descriptive analysis
As shown in Table 2, the demographic proﬁle of the informants suggests that tourist harassment incidents were reported by more female than male tourists. If the missing data are
excluded, approximately 41 percent of those who reported to have been harassed were in
Table 2. Descriptive proﬁle of informants.
Variable
Gender (n = 99; missing values = 22)
Male
Female
Age (n = 62; missing values = 59)
18–24
25–34
35–49
50–64
65+
Country of origin (n = 104; missing values = 17)
Americas
Europe
Asia Paciﬁc
Middle East
Africa
Overall experience (n = 121)
Terrible
Poor
Average
Very good
Excellent

Frequency

Percentage (%)

42
57

42.4
57.6

1
15
26
15
5

1.6
24.2
41.9
24.2
8.1

52
29
11
10
2

50
27.9
10.6
9.6
1,9

5
8
12
28
68

4.1
6.6
9.9
23.2
56.2

8

Z. ALRAWADIEH AND Z. ALRAWADIEH

their middle age (35–49 year-old). With respect to the country of origin, the informants
belong to 25 diﬀerent countries. About one-half of the informants were from the Americas
(with the overwhelming majority from the USA), followed by those from Europe (particularly from the UK), and Asia Paciﬁc (mainly from Australia). Similar studies identiﬁed American and European travelers as being the groups most targeted by harassers (Qiao et al.,
2017). Although harassment incidents were reported as negative experiences, the majority
(approximately 79 percent) of informants rated their visit as very good or excellent (Mean
= 4.2; SD = 1.1). In general, many more harassment incidents occurred in Petra than in
Jerash. This may be due to the high traﬃc of both tourists and locals in Petra compared
to Jerash.

Types of tourist harassment
Travelers’ anecdotes included in the present study consisted of a 66-page Word ﬁle. Following the analysis process, six categories of tourist harassment were identiﬁed. These categories are as follows:
−
−
−
−
−
−

Vendors’ persistence (75 cases)
Obtrusive on-site service providers (68 cases)
Beggar children (29 cases)
Sexual harassment (15 cases)
Verbal abuse (12 cases)
Physical abuse (5 cases)

Given that some anecdotes mentioned more than one type of harassment, the cases of
harassment incidents (204 cases) exceeded the number of anecdotes included in the study
(121 anecdotes). In the following section, each one of the identiﬁed categories is explained
in detail.

Vendors’ persistence
Tourists visiting archeological sites frequently mentioned being constantly pestered by
vendors and peddlers trying to sell them goods such as souvenirs, trinkets, and postcards.
These incidents were labeled as vendor persistence. For instance, a middle-aged American
woman who rated her visit to Petra as ‘average’ elaborated on this issue as follows:
We were constantly surrounded by people trying to sell us […] jewelry, postcards, wood
ﬁgures, kids selling rocks, etc … It’s distracting, frustrating, and sometimes frightening
when the sellers won’t take no for an answer. […]. The vendors should be eliminated from
the park–or segregate them to a speciﬁc area that visitors can choose to enter. […]. Let
people enjoy the natural beauty of the historically signiﬁcant site and then give them [the]
option to buy goods and services outside the park. The constant barrage from the vendors
took away from our experience and I wouldn’t want to go there again if the experience
was the same. It was uncomfortable and frustrating. (A12).

Such persistence may stem from a ‘get rich quick’ mentality, which has been said to be
dominant in tourist destinations in developing countries (Tosun, 2001). Vendors harass
foreign tourists to buy touristy items that are typically unauthentic. A recent study by

JOURNAL OF TOURISM AND CULTURAL CHANGE

9

Alazaizeh, Hallo, Backman, Norman, and Vogel (2018) suggested that vendor persistence
was frequently mentioned by travelers visiting Petra as a signiﬁcant drawback. Vendor persistence has also been identiﬁed as being the most common type of tourist harassment in
previous research (Badu-Baiden et al., 2016; de Albuquerque & McElroy, 2001; Kozak, 2007;
Skipper, 2009). While vendors may simply consider themselves doing business, travelers
may perceive vendors’ attempts as being a vexing form of harassment (McElroy et al.,
2007). In fact, in his study, Kozak (2007) suggested that Turkish vendors did not consider
themselves doing something wrong in approaching tourists.

Obtrusive on-site service providers
The second most mentioned category relates to the persistent harassment by locals
oﬀering services inside the archeological sites. In particular, tourists complained about
animal handlers (horses, donkeys, and camels) who hassle them to take animal or carriage
rides. Attempts by freelance tour guides (or perhaps unoﬃcial would-be tour guides) to
sell tours are also included in this category. Unlike vendors and peddlers, some of the
on-site service providers may be important to enhance the tourist experience, and even
necessary to meet the needs of some tourists. For instance, most archaeological sites in
Jordan are inaccessible for travelers with disabilities (Tabazah, 2017), therefore, carriage
rides are the sole solution available for the moment. However, tourists complained
about the constant harassment from the animals’ handlers who oﬀer rides. When elaborating on this issue, many travelers expressed concern about the mistreatment of animals
by their handlers. A young English woman who had an excellent visit to Petra mentioned:
The only upsetting thing was being constantly hassled by the locals to be taken by donkey,
horse or camel around the area. It was disgusting to see the treatment of these poor creatures,
and seeing overweight and lazy tourists taking these forms of transport up steep climbs […].
Fine if you’ve got a disability, after all everyone has the right to see Petra, but it does anger me
to see the animals so mistreated. (A29)

Beggar children
Harassment from beggar children is the third top issue mentioned by tourists. This type of
harassment is probably the ﬁrst to appear in the tourism landscape. For instance, Weaver
(1995) reported that tourist harassment by beggars was observed as early as 1936 in Plymouth, England. Recently, Andriotis (2016) explored beggar-tourist interactions and proposed that a segment of the tourists tend to feel harassed when approached by
beggars, and that they reacted in diﬀerent ways, including making donations to the
beggar to get rid of the harassment. Unfortunately, in some developing countries, children
are exploited at tourist attractions to gain proﬁts from tourists by evoking feelings of pity.
Such hassle from beggar children is viewed as a form of harassment that mars tourist’s
experiences. As suggested by a middle-aged American woman who rated her visit as
very good:
These people are insuﬀerable … […]. The little girl who walks alongside you claiming she
wants to be a doctor when she grows up … .so she can help people … .right before she
badgers you for a “gift”. When I gave her 1 JOD [about US$ 1.4] she gave it back to me
saying “you keep it” … it was too little for her!!. (A104)

10

Z. ALRAWADIEH AND Z. ALRAWADIEH

It may be plausible to assume that modern travelers are more informed and therefore
are more likely to behave in responsible way in the host communities with respect to this
issue. Most of those who had been harassed by children showed responsibility and urged
other potential travelers not to give children money as they should be sent to school. For
instance, a Brazilian woman who reported having had an excellent trip to Jerash
mentioned:
I was recommended (and do recommend others) not to buy things from the children. There is
a big campaign in Jordan to take the kids from the streets [e]specially in touristic sites and
send them to school (which they resist as long as there will be people buying souvenirs
and water from them). So please join the forces to mitigate such local problem in Jerash.
(A118)

Sexual harassment
As noted by McElroy et al. (2007), sexual harassment against tourists has been a permanent feature in tourism, particularly in developing countries. Out of 204 harassment incidents mentioned in the tourists’ anecdotes, 15 incidents (approximately 7%) were sexual
in nature, including soliciting for a sexual relationship and physical abuse motivated by
sexual desire. As expected, most incidents of sexual harassment were reported by
female tourists. This also aligns with ﬁndings reported in previous studies (de Albuquerque
& McElroy, 2001). An English woman who reported having had an excellent experience
mentioned:
I did this trip as part of a tour group and unfortunately was harassed by a local man. Despite
wearing a wedding ring, he kept trying to touch me and invited me back to his place. When I
informed him I was married, he just winked and said ‘me too- but my wife doesn’t mind’. I
would be very wary of traveling as a solo female. Despite the negatives it is really a great
place to see. (A52)

Tourists seem to be aware of the possible traps that may eventually lead to sexual harassment. A Swiss woman noted that:
Donkey handlers with the eye-liner are the gypsies, […] they want to get into a relationship
[with female tourists], they would invite female tourists to dinner at their family’s cave, sister’s
cave, brother’s cave, their cave, whatever, and say that they would show you how to make tea,
how to cook traditional dinner to show their hospitality. […] It can end up pricey. These guys
abuse the real Jordanian hospitality!!!. (A3)

Discussions with local tourism experts indicate that the key driver for sexual harassment
is the perpetrators’ desire to enhance their status and to prove superiority among their
peers. This lends support to similar ﬁndings reported in previous studies (Bowman,
1996; Cohen, 1971).

Verbal abuse
Oﬀensive behaviors such as using obscene language and name-calling against tourists are
referred to as verbal abuse. Conﬁrming previous studies (e.g. de Albuquerque & McElroy,
2001), most of the reported verbal abuse cases in the present study appear to be stemming from travelers’ interaction with vendors and on-site service providers. In other

JOURNAL OF TOURISM AND CULTURAL CHANGE

11

words, this type of harassment is likely to be triggered by tourists’ unresponsiveness to
locals’ attempts to make sales. For instance, an Icelandic gentleman who reported
having had a terrible experience elaborated as follows:
Me and my girlfriend were harassed every step of the way. People [were] constantly trying to
sell us something or trying to get us on their horse/camel/donkey. At one point a guy was so
angry with us because we didńt want to ride his camel that he followed us and exclaimed that
we were not welcome in Jordan and should go back to our country. That made me sad. (A7)

Physical abuse
As an extreme type of harassment, physical abuse refers to behaviors that may cause
evident physical harm to the victim. Incidents of badgering bodily contact, even for the
sake of selling, things were deemed as being physical abuse. Thankfully, incidents
falling in this category are the least likely to occur (approximately 2.5%). In one
example, a senior Australian gentleman who rated his visit as poor noted that:
[…] the hawkers (adults and children) selling trinkets and postcards accost you all the way
down and get quite aggressive pulling on your arms and clothes. You basically have to be
rude to them to get rid of them. (A85)

Tourists’ response to harassment
In their narratives, some tourists provided insights into how they reacted to the harassment incident that they had experienced. Of the 121 anecdotes, 50 (or approximately
41 percent) accounted for their responses to harassment. As illustrated in Figure 1, the
majority (62 percent) reported to have resisted harassment by declining and saying ‘no
thank you’. Twelve percent reported to have just walked out and ignored the harassers.
Unsurprisingly, only 6 percent of tourists chose to complain to the local authorities,
which lends support to the notion that tourists are unlikely to report harassment to the
local police (McElroy et al., 2007).
Tourists’ response to harassment varies from resisting the incident to reporting it to the
local authorities. Avoidance strategies were reported as being the ideal response by the
overwhelming majority of tourists in this study. The ‘no thank you’ strategy was also
reported in previous research as being tourists’ most common reaction to harassment

Figure 1. Tourists’ response to harassment.

12

Z. ALRAWADIEH AND Z. ALRAWADIEH

(Skipper, 2009). In her study, Skipper (2009) noted that some tourists responded to harassment by saying maybe later. In the present study, travelers acknowledge that trying to
avoid harassers by promising to buy from them later is not an appropriate strategy. For
instance, an American senior woman who had an excellent trip to Petra claimed:
If you do not want to be pestered beyond endurance, if someone asks if you want a ride or a
souvenir, do not say “maybe later”. The peddlers have a rather uncanny memory and every
person in our group who had said ‘maybe’ earlier [was] followed and harassed as they
headed out at the end of the day. I ﬁrmly said “no” from the get-go and was not bothered
in the slightest. Interesting. I’m impressed by their faculty to remember faces!. (A49)

As suggested by de Albuquerque and McElroy (2001, p. 490), ‘the greater the degree of
poverty in host societies, the greater the number of vendors, beggars, and would-be tour
guides assailing tourists for a few dollars’. Several anecdotes analyzed in the present study
lends support to this notion. Tourists noted that tourism in Jordan has deteriorated as a
result of the conﬂict in the Middle East, and they associated the increasing harassing behaviors to the locals’ need to make a living. A senior English woman mentioned:
You do get hassled constantly by people asking you to pay for donkey rides, camel rides, horse
rides, carriage rides, or to buy something from them - which does get a little tiresome, but you
can’t blame these people, tourism is well down on the numbers there used to be and they
need to make a living. (A36)

In fact, the rates of tourist harassment incidents dropped dramatically in 2010, a year in
which over 8 million tourists visited Jordan. However, these rates rose again with the
decreasing number of tourist arrivals (Personal Communication with an ofﬁcial at Petra
Development and Tourism Region Authority, November, 2017).

Conclusions
This paper explored the typology of tourist harassment in archeological sites by using a
non-traditional research method. A general ﬁnding of the study indicates that travelers’
online narratives constitute an important source of rich data for exploring the issue of
tourist harassment. Unlike previous studies that used structured methods, this paper
drew on a netnographic study approach which provided a deeper understanding of the
typology of tourist harassment. The study identiﬁed six key categories of tourist harassment, namely, vendors’ persistence, obtrusive on-site service providers, beggar children,
sexual harassment, verbal abuse, and physical abuse. Based on the travelers’ anecdotes,
the study also developed a typology of tourists’ response to harassment.
The study makes some theoretical contributions. First, it explores in depth the behaviors that constitute tourist harassment. This is important to guide future research addressing this topic. In this vein, the qualitative data provided interesting insights suggesting
that harassment may not necessarily have a negative impact on travelers’ overall vacation
satisfaction. Second, a review of the limited literature on tourist harassment reveals a bias
toward quantitative research methods. The present study oﬀered a richer understanding
of tourist harassment by drawing on a qualitative research method. In a narrower sense,
except for a study by Nicely and Ghazali (2014), travelers’ online narratives were largely
neglected in past research. A major limitation of Nicely and Ghazali’s (2014) study is
that they conceived harassment solely as a negative encounter involving tourists and

JOURNAL OF TOURISM AND CULTURAL CHANGE

13

sellers. The present study provided a comprehensive typology of tourist harassment that
goes beyond the trading process.
Tourist harassment is a challenging issue with adverse impacts on travelers’ perceptions, satisfaction, and behavioral intentions. These impacts have the potential to jeopardize the competitive advantage of tourism destinations thereby limiting the economic
beneﬁts of the tourism industry. Therefore, it is imperative for DMOs to design and
implement knowledge-based strategies to combat tourist harassment. It is unrealistic to
claim that tourist harassment can be easily eradicated. However, if all tourism stakeholders
are involved, reducing harassment incidents is possible. Most of those involved in harassing tourists in archeological sites lack basic education. Even children begging or selling
fake items were said to be coming from families whose education levels are quite low
and who therefore are less likely to care about their children’s education. Moreover,
some of the tourism experts accused local law enforcement agencies of being too lax in
enforcing the law against perpetrators. The Jordanian authorities acknowledged the
importance of ensuring foreign tourists’ safety as early as 1958 when the ﬁrst tourist
police force was established in Jerusalem with detachments in several tourist hotspots,
including Petra (PSD, 2016). Although criminalizing tourist harassment is inevitable, its
eﬀectiveness in the long-term may be questionable. Harassers are unlikely to give up
even after being punished, particularly if they see nothing wrong in harassing tourists.
Instead, they may spontaneously give up harassment if they are involved in a more sustainable and healthy business environment that guarantees them ﬁnancial outcomes
without the need to harass tourists. In addition, research suggests that adopting a cognitive restructuring approach by convincing harassers that their behaviors go completely
counter to their best interests is essential to curbing harassment (Nicely & Ghazali, 2017).
The ﬁndings of the present study suggest that vendors’ persistence is the dominant
form of harassment in archeological sites. Vendors are perhaps unaware of the longterm devastating consequences of their behavior on the tourism industry, and thus on
the welfare of their society which depends largely on tourism. Therefore, DMOs may
hold seminars and training courses to educate those vendors on the adverse impacts of
harassing tourists while trying to sustain business.
To mitigate harassment from obtrusive on-site service providers, visitor centers where
tickets are usually obtained, might introduce a system by which tourists can add services
to their tickets. For instance, if a tourist wishes to take a carriage or animal ride, s/he can
add this service to the ticket. This service should also be assigned to a speciﬁc service provider in order to prevent competition and thus harassment from the other on-site service
providers. It should be emphasized, however, that the ticket to Petra actually includes a
short free animal ride from the main gate of Petra to the beginning of the Siq (about
400 meters). Yet many tourists mentioned that they were harassed by animals’ handlers
who pressured them for tips. Therefore, expanding the ‘service added to ticket’ will not
be enough if the service is not assigned to a speciﬁc service provider. This will ensure
better control of the quality of the services provided. Training service providers on the
best practices of service delivery is also essential. At the same time, tourists can be recommended not to accept oﬀers from would-be tour guides.
Harassment by children emerged as a major form of tourist harassment in the archeological sites. Although existing in both Petra and Jerash, the issue seems to be more common in
Petra. Currently, there are over 80 children who frequently appear inside the archeological

14

Z. ALRAWADIEH AND Z. ALRAWADIEH

site of Petra (Personal Communication with an oﬃcial at Petra Development and Tourism
Region Authority, November, 2017). Those children typically belong to the Bedouin tribe
known as Bidul. Considered ‘destructive to Petra’s ancient ruins and a bother to the tourists’,
the Jordanian government removed the tribe from Petra and relocated its members to a
nearby settlement in the early 1980s (Shoup, 1985, p. 283). Informal discussions with
tourism experts indicate that the parents of those children typically lack basic education.
Therefore, they see nothing wrong in having their children involved in harassing tourists
for ﬁnancial gain. Initially, it may be plausible to assume that those children are victims. Therefore, the local authorities should identify them, locate their families, and ensure that those
children are sent to school. Moreover, tourists should be advised not to give money or
buy items from children. This may be possible through brochures or similar methods.
Sexual harassment and physical abuse against tourists may be deemed as extreme
types of harassment. Again, education is the best long-term strategy. Local civil society
associations may launch initiatives to spread awareness among locals on the importance
of ethical practices and gentle hospitality as important assets for the tourism industry. At
the same time, local agencies can encourage tourists to report such incidents immediately
to the tourist police station.
Incorporating the topic of tourist harassment in both high schools and undergraduate
tourism and hospitality curriculums may be deemed as an appropriate long-term strategy.
These students will be tomorrow’s tourism and hospitality leaders and workers. Practically,
the topic may be incorporated as part of courses addressing relative issues such as sustainability and responsible tourism.
Although the present study provided signiﬁcant insights into the issue of tourist harassment, it was limited by the relatively small size of the sample and its focus on only two
archeological sites in Jordan. Before the ﬁndings can be generalized, further investigation
may consider larger samples and diﬀerent contexts. In addition, the sample in the present
study is clearly biased toward North American and European travelers. Using quota
sampling to equally represent other segments may be needed. It also may be of signiﬁcant
interest to conduct cross-cultural studies to explore as to whether perceptions of and
response to harassment vary based on the cultures from which travelers come. Replicating
this study using narratives from diﬀerent online communities and collecting primary data
from travelers may be needed to conﬁrm the validity of the ﬁndings reported in this paper.

Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Professor Gloria Bien and Ms. Sarah Harpending for having read the
manuscript of this paper and for having made useful suggestions upon it.

Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.

Notes on contributors
Zaid Alrawadieh holds a Ph.D. degree in Tourism Management (Turkey) and a Master’s degree in
Tourism and Environment (Italy). Currently, he lectures in the Department of Hotel, Restaurant
and Catering Services at Istanbul University Cerrahpasa, Turkey (zaid.alrawadieh@istanbul.edu.tr).

JOURNAL OF TOURISM AND CULTURAL CHANGE

15

His research interests include customer complaining behavior, tourist experiences, tourist behavior,
and peer-to-peer accommodation.
Ziad Alrawadieh is an associate professor in the School of Archaeology and Tourism at the University
of Jordan, Amman, Jordan (z.rawadieh@ju.edu.jo). He obtained his Ph.D. in Tourism Management
(Italy) and was a visiting scholar at Leeds Metropolitan University (UK). His main research interests
include ecotourism, local tourism products and regional development, and heritage tourism.

ORCID
Zaid Alrawadieh
Ziad Alrawadieh

http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8355-9958
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3809-675X

References
Ajagunna, I. (2006). Crime and harassment in Jamaica: Consequences for sustainability of the tourism
industry. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 18(3), 253–259.
Alazaizeh, M. M., Hallo, J. C., Backman, S. J., Norman, W. C., & Vogel, M. A. (2018). Giving voice to heritage tourists: Indicators of quality for a sustainable heritage experience at Petra, Jordan. Journal of
Tourism and Cultural Change, doi:10.1080/14766825.2018.1455693
Alrawadieh, Z., & Alrawadieh, Z. (2018). Exploring entrepreneurship in the sharing accommodation sector:
Empirical evidence from a developing country. Tourism Management Perspectives, 28, 179–188.
Alrawadieh, Z., Alrawadieh, Z., & Kozak, M. (2019). Exploring the impact of tourist harassment on destination image, tourist expenditure, and destination loyalty. Tourism Management, 73, 13–20.
Alrawadieh, Z., Dincer, M. Z., Dincer, F. I., & Mammadova, P. (2018). Understanding destination image
from the perspective of Western travel bloggers: The case of Istanbul. International Journal of
Culture, Tourism and Hospitality Research, 12(2), 198–212.
Andriotis, K. (2016). Beggars–tourists’ interactions: An unobtrusive typological approach. Tourism
Management, 52, 64–73.
Badu-Baiden, F., Adu-Boahen, E. A., & Otoo, F. E. (2016). Tourists’ response to harassment: A study of
international tourists to Ghana. Anatolia: An International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality
Research, 27(4), 468–479.
Baloglu, S., Henthorne, T. L., & Sahin, S. (2014). Destination image and brand personality of Jamaica: A
model of tourist behavior⍰. Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 31(8), 1057–1070.
Bowman, G. W. (1996). Passion, power and politics in a Palestinian tourist market. In T. Selwyn (Ed.),
The tourist image: Myths and myth making in tourism (pp. 83–103). New York and London: John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.
Breitsohl, J., & Garrod, B. (2016). Assessing tourists’ cognitive, emotional and behavioural reactions to
an unethical destination incident. Tourism Management, 54, 209–220.
Carneiro, M. J., Eusébio, C., & Caldeira, A. (2018). The inﬂuence of social contact in residents’ perceptions of the tourism impact on their quality of life: A structural equation model. Journal of Quality
Assurance in Hospitality & Tourism, 19(1), 1–30.
Cetin, G., & Bilgihan, A. (2016). Components of cultural tourists’ experiences in destinations. Current
Issues in Tourism, 19(2), 137–154.
Chepkwony, R., & Kangogo, M. (2013). Nature and factors inﬂuencing tourist harassment at coastal
beach of Mombasa, Kenya. International Research Journal of Social Sciences, 2(11), 17–22.
Cohen, E. (1971). Arab boys and tourist girls in a mixed Jewish Arab community. International Journal
of Comparative Sociology, 12(4), 217–233.
de Albuquerque, K., & McElroy, J. L. (2001). Tourist harassment: Barbados survey results. Annals of
Tourism Research, 28(2), 477–492.
Decrop, A., Chiappa, G. D., Mallargé, J., & Zidda, P. (2018). “Couchsurﬁng has made me a better person
and the world a better place”: the transformative power of collaborative tourism experiences.
Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 35(1), 57–72.

16

Z. ALRAWADIEH AND Z. ALRAWADIEH

Dinçer, M. Z., & Alrawadieh, Z. (2017). Negative word of mouse in the hotel industry: A content analysis of online reviews on luxury hotels in Jordan. Journal of Hospitality Marketing & Management, 26
(8), 785–804.
Dunn, H., & Dunn, L. (2002). Tourism and popular perceptions: Mapping Jamaican attitudes. Social
and Economic Studies, 51(1), 25–45.
Eusébio, C., Vieira, A. L., & Lima, S. (2018). Place attachment, host–tourist interactions, and residents’
attitudes towards tourism development: The case of Boa Vista Island in Cape Verde. Journal of
Sustainable Tourism, 26(6), 890–909.
Gursoy, D., Cai, R., & Anaya, G. J. (2017). Developing a typology of disruptive customer behaviors:
Inﬂuence of customer misbehavior on service experience of by-standing customers.
International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 29(9), 2341–2360.
Henthorne, T. L., George, B. P., & Smith, W. C. (2013). Risk perception and buying behavior: An examination of some relationships in the context of cruise tourism in Jamaica. International Journal of
Hospitality & Tourism Administration, 14(1), 66–86.
Holcomb, J., & Pizam, A. (2006). Do incidents of theft at tourist destinations have a negative eﬀect on
tourists’ decisions to travel to aﬀected destinations? In Y. Mansfeld, & A. Pizam (Eds.), Tourism,
Security and safety (pp. 105–124). Oxford, UK: Elsevier Butterworth–Heinemann.
Karayilan, E., & Cetin, G. (2016). Tourism destination: Design of experiences. In M. Sotiriadis, & D.
Gursoy (Eds.), The Handbook of managing and marketing tourism experiences (pp. 65–83).
Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Korzay, M., & Alvarez, M. D. (2005). Satisfaction and dissatisfaction of Japanese tourists in Turkey.
Anatolia: An International Journal of Tourism and Hospitality Research, 16(2), 176–193.
Kozak, M. (2002). Destination benchmarking. Annals of Tourism Research, 29(2), 497–519.
Kozak, M. (2007). Tourist harassment: A marketing perspective. Annals of Tourism Research, 34(2),
384–399.
Kozak, M. (2016). Bargaining behavior and the shopping experiences of British tourists on vacation.
Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 33(3), 313–325.
Kozinets, R. V. (2002). The ﬁeld behind the screen: Using netnography for marketing research in
online. Journal of Marketing Research, 39(1), 61–72.
Kozinets, R. V. (2007). Netnography 2.0. In R. W. Belk (Ed.), Handbook of qualitative research methods in
marketing (pp. 129–42). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing.
McElroy, J. L., Tarlow, P., & Carlisle, K. (2007). Tourist harassment: Review of the literature and destination responses. International Journal of Culture, Tourism and Hospitality Research, 1(4), 305–314.
MoTA. (2011). Tourism Statistical Newsletter 2011. Retrieved from http://www.mota.gov.jo/Contents/
Tourism_Statistical_Newsletter_2011.aspx
MoTA. (2017). Statistical Newsletter 2017. Retrieved from http://www.mota.gov.jo/Contents/
Statistical_Summary_2017_.aspx
Nicely, A., & Armadita, F. (2017). How resilient are repeat visitors to trader harassment? Tourism
Management Perspectives, 23, 154–156.
Nicely, A., & Ghazali, R. M. (2014). Demystifying visitor harassment. Annals of Tourism Research, 48,
266–269.
Nicely, A., & Ghazali, R. M. (2017). Mitigating aggressive small trade at tourist destinations through
cognitive restructuring. International Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Administration, 18(2), 171–
194.
Pizam, A., Tarlow, P. E., & Bloom, J. (1997). Making tourists feel safe: Whose responsibility is it? Journal
of Travel Research, 36(1), 23–28.
PSD. (2016). Annual Report 2016. Public Security Directorate. Retrieved from https://www.psd.gov.jo/
images/tourism/docs/report2016.pdf
Qiao, G., Chen, N., & Prideaux, B. (2017). Understanding interactions between beggars and international tourists: The case of China. Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Tourism Research, 22(3), 272–283.
Roehl, W. S., & Fesenmaier, D. R. (1992). Risk perceptions and pleasure travel: An exploratory analysis.
Journal of Travel Research, 30(4), 17–26.
Ryan, C. (1993). Crime, violence, terrorism and tourism: An accidental or intrinsic relationship?
Tourism Management, 14(3), 173–183.

JOURNAL OF TOURISM AND CULTURAL CHANGE

17

Shoup, J. (1985). The impact of tourism on the Bedouin of Petra. Middle East Journal, 39(2), 277–291.
Skipper, T. L. (2009). Understanding tourist-host interactions and their inﬂuence on quality tourism
experiences. (Unpublished master’s thesis). Wilfrid Laurier University, Ottawa, Canada.
Tabazah, S. (2017). Most archaeological sites in Jordan inaccessible for people with disabilities. Retrieved
from The Jordan Times: http://www.jordantimes.com/news/local/most-archaeological-sitesjordan-inaccessible-people-disabilities’
Tosun, C. (2001). Challenges of sustainable tourism development in the developing world: The case
of Turkey. Tourism Management, 22(3), 289–303.
Üngüren, E., Arslan, S., & Kaçmaz, Y. Y. (2015). Bir turist taciz türü olarak hanutçuluğun turistler
üzerindeki etkisi. Akdeniz Üniversitesi İktisadi Ve İdari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi, 32, 129–174.
Walker, L., & Page, S. J. (2007). The visitor experience of crime: The case of Central Scotland. Current
Issues in Tourism, 10(6), 505–542.
Weaver, D. B. (1995). Alternative tourism in Montserrat. Tourism Management, 16(8), 593–604.
Wu, M.-Y., & Pearce, P. L. (2014). Chinese recreational vehicle users in Australia: A netnographic study
of tourist motivation. Tourism Management, 43, 22–35.
Xiang, Z., Schwartz, Z., Gerdes, J. H., & Uysal, M. (2015). What can big data and text analytics tell us
about hotel guest experience and satisfaction? International Journal of Hospitality Management,
44, 120–130.

