Do Game Designers’ Decisions Related to Visual Activities Affect
Knowledge Acquisition in Cultural Heritage Games? An Evaluation
From       a Human Cognitive Processing Perspective

GEORGE E. RAPTIS, CHRISTOS FIDAS, and NIKOLAOS AVOURIS, University of Patras

In the cultural heritage domain, games have been used to engage users into an 
active state of learning through immersive
and playful interactions that include visually enriched interaction contexts. 
There is evidence that individual differences in
the inherent way people search, process, analyze, comprehend, store, and 
retrieve visual information in their surrounding
environment are reflected in their performance, experience, effectiveness, and 
efficiency in such environments. Despite the
fact        that cultural heritage game designers favor learning experiences in 
such contexts, current design and evaluation prac-
tices of cultural heritage games barely consider the gamers’ individual 
differences in visual information processing. This can
be attributed to a deficiency in understanding and modeling the effects among 
users’ visual behavior, gameplay behavior,
and cognitive styles in cultural heritage games toward knowledge acquisition, 
resulting in insufficient methods of creating
cognition-centered user models and considering such human cognitive factors 
practically, within current state-of-the-art
design                and evaluation approaches. To address this gap, we 
selected three known cultural heritage games, adopted a credible
cognitive style theory, and performed, over a 6-month period, three separate 
evaluation user studies (N = 127) following a
between-subject, eye-tracking based, experimental design. The results of the 
evaluation studies revealed that game designers’
decisions, related to visual search, unintentionally favored users with 
specific cognitive characteristics by influencing their
visual and consequently gameplay behavior, resulting in differences in 
knowledge acquisition. The results of the evalua-
tion studies also revealed correlation effects during gameplay among individual 
differences in visual information processing,
users’ visual behavior strategies, and gameplay behavior. The findings 
necessitate the consideration of cognitive characteris-
tics as evaluation and design factors when delivering cultural heritage 
activities that are based on visual search tasks. Their
consideration will help us better understand and explain the different 
information processing approaches in cultural heritage
contexts   and will drive the design of adaptive mechanisms for delivering 
personalized cultural heritage activities, tailored to
the users’ unique cognitive characteristics.

CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction (HCI); • 
Social and professional                        4

topics → User characteristics;

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Individual cognitive differences, cultural 
heritage gaming, visual behavior

Authors’ addresses: G. E. Raptis and N. Avouris, HCI Group, Department of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Patras,
Greece; emails: raptisg@upnet.gr, avouris@upatras.gr; C. Fidas, Department of 
Cultural Heritage Management and New Technologies, Uni-
versity of Patras, Greece; email: fidas@upatras.gr.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must 
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions
from permissions@acm.org.

© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM.
1556-4673/2019/02-ART4 $15.00

https://doi.org/10.1145/3292057


ACM Reference format:

George E. Raptis, Christos Fidas, and Nikolaos Avouris. 2019. Do Game 
Designers’ Decisions Related to Visual Activities
Affect Knowledge Acquisition in Cultural Heritage Games? An Evaluation From a 
Human Cognitive Processing Perspective.
ACM J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 12, 1, Article 4 (February 2019), 25 pages.

https://doi.org/10.1145/3292057

1    INTRODUCTION

A plethora of research has been conducted in the cultural heritage domain 
aiming to scaffold cultural heritage
learning activities and improve users’ experience through immersive cultural 
heritage games [4, 66, 72]. The
main objective of game designers is to engage the users in playful cultural 
heritage activities in which they ac-
tively explore the educational content rather than passively receive it [72]. 
In this context, knowledge acquisition
and learning are anticipated to occur by triggering the users’ curiosity [28, 
103], teamwork, collaboration, and
competitiveness [20, 112], thus encouraging the construction of knowledge and 
the building of meaning through
playful        and immersive activities [72]. However, people differ in the way 
we perceive and process visual infor-
mation [69, 79, 99, 127]. Several researchers have attempted to understand and 
explain such differences from
a cognitive styles’ perspective [52, 99]. A fundamental cognitive style is the 
Field Dependence-Independence
(FD-I) style [127], which is a credible and validated framework [6, 65], and 
the cornerstone of other cognitive
styles [99]. According to FD-I theory, people are classified either as field 
dependent (FD) or as field independent
(FI), based on their ability to extract information in visually complex scenes. 
FDs tend to prefer a holistic way
when processing and organizing visual information, and they have difficulties 
in identifying details in complex
visual scenes [127]. However, FIs tend to prefer an analytical information 
processing approach, pay attention to
details, and easily separate simple structures from the surrounding visual 
context [127]. Therefore, FD-I theory
underpins cognitive differences in visual perceptiveness and in handling 
contextual information either holisti-
cally      or analytically [76, 91].

Even though several studies have highlighted the effect of FD-I on visual 
processing activities [46, 68, 76, 93,
106], gameplay behavior [1, 21, 23, 42, 63, 70, 90, 92], and knowledge 
acquisition/learning [7, 25, 60, 77, 107, 131]
and considering that FDs and FIs differ in the way they search, process, and 
comprehend information [52, 99,
127], current state-of-the-art game design and evaluation methods do not 
consider users’ FD-I style as either
a design or an evaluation factor. The reason for this is that the underlying 
mechanics of such effects have not
been investigated in depth, resulting in an insufficient understanding on how 
to consider such cognitive factors
practically, within current state-of-the-art cultural heritage game design and 
evaluation approaches. Hence, our
research question is to investigate whether and which game designers’ decisions 
related to visual information
processing favor or hinder individuals with specific cognitive characteristics 
toward knowledge acquisition.

Stimulated by the aforementioned reasoning and considering that, especially 
within the cultural heritage do-
main, activities that include information processing tasks are favored, we 
investigate whether users with dif-
ferent cognitive styles follow different strategies when interacting with such 
activities, whether these strategies
are reflected in the users’ behavior, and whether this behavior can be 
correlated with the acquired knowledge.
The interplay among the aforementioned factors (i.e., human cognition, 
interactive behavior, and knowledge
acquisition) has not been investigated in depth in cultural heritage contexts, 
and thus there is a deficiency in un-
derstanding the underlying mechanics of the effects among these factors. Hence, 
answering the aforementioned
research objectives will provide a new perspective for evaluators to consider 
individual cognitive characteristics
as      an important evaluation parameter. Considering human cognition as an 
evaluation parameter will help the
evaluators reveal and explain user behaviors that could not been explained when 
the cognition factor is omitted,
better understand how specific activity factors can be tailored to individual 
cognitive preferences and needs, and
raise issues and make suggestions that support the design-for-all principles 
aiming for wider user diversity and
inclusion.


To investigate the aforementioned research objectives, we selected three 
popular cultural heritage games,
which were developed by expert game designers and were deployed by professional 
cultural heritage institutions
and industry, aiming to capture a representative range of game mechanics and 
genres in the cultural heritage
domain. We recruited, over a 6-month study, 127 individuals who participated in 
a between-subjects eye-tracking
evaluation study. Our goal was to investigate the underlying mechanics and 
interdependencies among users’
behavior (both gameplay and visual behavior) and FD-I cognitive style toward 
knowledge acquisition; thus, we
aim       to feature the importance of considering human cognition as an 
evaluation factor that could drive the design
of personalized games adjusted to users’ cognitive characteristics.

The remainder of the article is structured as follows. First, we analyze the 
related work. Next, we present the
motivation of this research endeavor. Thereafter, we describe the context and 
the method of the user studies,
followed by an analysis of results and discussion of the main findings. 
Finally, we outline the implications of the
reported research and conclude the article.

2    RELATED WORK

The design of cultural heritage games is a challenging endeavor, given that 
several design factors need to be con-
sidered, such as game characteristics, players’ characteristics, and 
contextual/organizational factors [10]. With
regard to the game per se, the design factors include the learning objectives 
(e.g., knowledge [37, 74], comprehen-
sion [10]), the cognitive skills they wish to trigger (e.g., observation or 
reflection [18]), the degree of complexity
(e.g., mini-games or complex-games [19]), the number of players (e.g., single 
player [12, 122], multiplayer [81,
122]), the theme/genre (e.g., simulation [74, 119], adventure [38, 85, 103], 
action [82, 87, 130]), the mode (e.g.,

interactive or adaptive [8], collaborative [50]), the audience (e.g., museum 
visitors [27, 85], city visitors [61, 81],
web/computer users [37, 119]), the game characteristics and mechanics (e.g., 
trivia-based missions [18, 57], trea-
sure hunt [48, 108], objective completion [66, 81]), the user interaction type 
(e.g., voice/visual [81, 122], haptic/

tangible [13, 84]), and the technology (e.g., desktop computers [37, 74, 85], 
mobile and tablet devices [15, 27, 56,

78, 108], augmented/virtual/mixed reality [58, 82, 87, 104, 130], domes [44]). 
The contextual/organizational design
factors are related to which information the game should provide about a given 
cultural heritage institution (e.g.,
archaeological site [11], museum [85, 115]), cultural heritage policies [30], 
available resources like personnel and
development budget, and the main goals set by the institution for the use of 
the developed games by its audience,
as            well measurable outcomes [10].

With regard to the human factors, the game designers must comply with the 
diversity of users who commonly
have different goals, motivations, information processing styles, and cognitive 
abilities [10], which is extremely
challenging in the case of first-time users, such as tourists who visit a 
cultural heritage site for the first time (and
maybe   the only time in their life). The majority of the end-users in the 
cultural heritage domain are occasional
and non-expert players, and due to the nature of the cultural heritage 
experiences (e.g., the users are engaged
in  a cultural activity only a few times, the users have limited time), the 
end-users cannot benefit from the gam-
ing learning curve (related to game mechanics, tools, etc.) to achieve their 
goals (e.g., knowledge acquisition)
efficiently. Therefore, finding the optimal balance between the effort and time 
required to learn the game and
the knowledge acquisition is a challenge that the game designers have to deal 
with, aiming to provide cultural
heritage games best suited to the players’ characteristics. Game designers 
consider several player characteristics,
which are based on several factors, such as personality factors (e.g., 
personality type [39, 67, 73], age [16, 71],
language and interests [53, 102, 111]), visitor type factors (e.g., 
social-behavioral types [29, 64], spatial-temporal
based types [54, 55, 129]), and other situational factors (e.g., time of the 
day, players’ previous knowledge and
experience, players’ tiredness levels, players’ time constraints and 
availability [10]).

Human cognition factors are not considered as design factors, although several 
researchers have acknowl-
edged existing effects toward visual behavior, gameplay behavior, and knowledge 
acquisition. Researchers have
revealed such effects for both elementary cognitive factors, such as working 
memory [51, 118, 124], and more


complex ones, such as cognitive styles [68, 76, 96]. Cognitive styles are of 
particular interest, as they represent
the individuals’ preferred mode of thinking and solving a problem, and they 
influence the approach an indi-
vidual follow to process and represent information [52]. In this context, a 
credible and validated cognitive style
framework [6, 65] is the FD-I style [127], which is highly related to visual 
exploration and search tasks. Scholars
have investigated the effects of FD-I cognitive style toward gameplay behavior, 
visual behavior, and knowledge
acquisition, as discussed next.

Regarding the gameplay behavior in cultural heritage contexts, our preliminary 
works [90, 92] revealed that
FDs needed less time to complete a game, whereas FIs interacted with more game 
items while playing. Naudet
et al. [73] revealed the effect of such cognitive differences through gameplay 
scenarios on a social network game
playing in a cultural heritage environment. Effects of cognitive factors have 
also been revealed for users playing
cultural heritage mini-games of varying characteristics [9, 10]. In addition to 
cultural heritage contexts, research
has shown that FDs demonstrate a general reluctance toward using games for 
learning activities [70]; FIs tend
to make fewer movements to solve puzzle tasks [42]; FIs perform better when 
playing games related to drawing,
identification, terminology, and comprehension [21]; FDs prefer social game 
playing, whereas FIs prefer to play
in        relative isolation [26]; FDs perform better in terms of frustration 
tolerance when playing collaborative games
[23]; and FDs are more effective in handling problem-solving strategies when 
playing in collaborative contexts
[63].

Regarding the visual behavior, FIs tend to pay attention to more critical game 
items than FDs and for longer
time periods [89]. Moreover, FDs tend to follow a more holistic approach when 
visually exploring a game scene,
whereas FIs prefer a more analytical and systematic approach [94]. In item 
identification and pattern recognition
tasks, which are common in cultural heritage games [27, 37], FIs produce more 
[45, 46, 68] and longer [45, 46,
132] fixations on the areas of interest covering large distance [46]; FDs 
produce more random fixations than
FIs [76], especially in complex tasks [93, 96]; FDs scan the scenes 
unsystematically in an unarticulated way with
many short fixations to nearly all regions [125]; FDs produce slower fixations 
[106]; FDs produce more left shifts,
whereas FIs produce a majority of right shifts [43]; and FIs have stronger eye 
convergence than FDs [109].

Regarding the knowledge acquisition, several researchers have studied the 
effects of FD-I on knowledge acqui-
sition and learning. According to Witkin et al. [127], FD-I has important 
implications for an individual’s cognitive
behavior and for his or her interpersonal behavior. FIs tend to be more 
autonomous in relation to the develop-
ment    of cognitive restructuring skills and less autonomous in relation to 
the development of interpersonal skills
[120]. Conversely, FDs tend to be more autonomous in relation to the 
development of high interpersonal skills
and less autonomous in relation to the development of cognitive restructuring 
skills. Furthermore, FIs generally
are analytical in their approach, whereas FDs are more holistic in their 
perceptions and have difficulty separat-
ing the part from the complex organization of the whole. Additionally, FIs tend 
to be intrinsically motivated and
enjoy individualized learning, whereas FDs tend to be extrinsically motivated 
and enjoy cooperative learning.
In the recent years, several studies have been conducted regarding the effect 
of FD-I on knowledge acquisition
and learning and confirm that, among the different cognitive styles identified 
in the literature, FD-I has had the
widest application to research related to knowledge acquisition and learning 
[35].

In particular, FDs tend to face more difficulties in abstracting relevant 
information from instruction support-
ing more difficult learning tasks [22]; FIs tend to absorb more efficiently 
formal-science [121] or multimedia

[60] material, whereas FDs tend to be more efficient on social-oriented courses 
[59, 127]; FIs benefit most from
the use of highly structured materials on the knowledge-acquisition process, 
whereas FDs benefit most from
low-structured materials [113]; FD and FI learners perform better in situated 
learning than traditional learning,
whereas     the instructional condition can significantly influence both FD and 
FI learners’ performance [131]; FI
individuals are faster and more efficient solvers when undertaking complex 
learning problems [101]; FI learners
tend       to outperform FD learners when engaged with a playful educational 
activity based on glass-box (model-
transparent) simulations [7]; FI learners can efficiently use computer tools to 
solve complex problems within an
educational context, as they tend to follow a more systematic and goal-directed 
approach than FDs [5]; FDs and


Fig. 1.  Research model adopted to investigate the interplay among human 
cognition, visual behavior, gameplay behavior,
and knowledge acquisition when playing cultural heritage games.

FIs follow different learning strategies that influence their learning outcome 
[107]; training environments (e.g.,
based on metacognitive strategies) influence FDs and FIs toward knowledge 
acquisition differently [77]; and FIs
tend to perform better than FIs toward knowledge acquisition on virtual 3D 
environments [128].

2.1    Motivation

Based on the aforementioned literature review, we conclude that there are 
sporadic research attempts underpin-
ning that FD-I influences users’ visual behavior, gameplay behavior, and 
knowledge acquisition. However, the
interplay among the aforementioned factors have not been investigated in depth 
in cultural heritage contexts,
and there is still a deficiency in understanding the underlying mechanics of 
the effects among visual behavior,
game playing activities, and human cognition toward knowledge acquisition 
within cultural heritage games. As
a result, cognitive styles are not considered as a design factor for cultural 
heritage games, although many of them
include visual search activities, such as MuseUs [27], ThIATRO [37], and 
TombSeer [82]. Consequently, human
cognition is not considered either as an evaluation factor, despite the wide 
range of factors used currently for
the evaluation of digital cultural heritage resources, such as cultural 
presence [88], users’ perception [33], and
emotions [83]. Therefore, in this articloe, we target the following research 
questions:

QA:  We investigate whether and which game designers’ decisions, related to 
visual search and exploration
activities, favor FD users or FI users. Investigating QA will highlight the 
relation between certain visual
design decisions, regarding search and exploration, and FD-I cognitive style 
factors.

QB:  We investigate the interplay among FD-I cognitive style, visual behavior, 
and gameplay behavior toward
knowledge acquisition. Investigating QB  will reveal the interaction effects 
among these factors within
cultural heritage contexts.

QC :  We investigate the correlation effects among the aforementioned factors. 
Investigating QC  will allow us
reason about the underlying mechanics and whether we can leverage on 
eye-gaze–driven differences of
FD-I users aiming to create cognitive-centered user models for personalizing 
cultural heritage games.

To investigate the research questions and interpret the derived research 
results, we propose and adopt a mul-
tilayered research and interaction analysis model that is based on the 
interplay of three pillars: human cognition
(e.g., individual cognitive characteristics), visual behavior (e.g., eye-gaze 
metrics), and game playing (e.g., game
performance metrics), with knowledge acquisition as the heart of the model. The 
model is depicted in Figure 1.


Table 1.  Cultural Heritage Games Used in Our Studies

Visual Search

Game                            Institution       Civilization                 
Genre                      Task Type                       Users


Time Explorer               British
Museum

Aztec                   Action, adventure,
puzzle

Free                             300,000+ users
annually


Escape From the
Mummy’s Tomb

Liverpool
Museum

Ancient Egypt     Quiz, puzzle                 Structured                   
200,000+ users

annually

HoloTour                       Microsoft           Inca Empire         Action, 
adventure        Free                             100+ downloads

3    METHOD

3.1    Hypotheses

To investigate the research questions QA, QB , and QC , we developed the 
following null hypotheses:

H0₁:  There is no significant difference in visual behavior between FD and FI 
individuals when playing cultural
heritage games, which favor either free or structured visual search tasks 
(related to QA).

H0₂:  There is no significant difference in gameplay behavior between FD and FI 
individuals when playing
cultural heritage games, which favor either free or structured visual search 
tasks (related to QA).

H0₃:  There is no significant difference in knowledge acquisition between FD 
and FI individuals after playing
cultural heritage games, which favor either free or structured visual search 
tasks (related to QB ).

H0₄:  There is no correlation between knowledge acquisition, gameplay behavior, 
and visual behavior of FD and
FI individuals when playing a cultural heritage game (related to QC ).

3.2    The Games

We selected three popular games that are representative of the most common 
cultural heritage game mechanics
and genres (i.e., action/adventure and quiz/puzzle according to Mortara et al. 
[72]), and they are based on varying
types of visual search tasks. The selected games are Time Explorer, Escape From 
the Mummy’s Tomb, and HoloTour.
All games include item collection tasks, which is a common characteristic of 
cultural heritage games [27, 37, 82,
85, 103]. The item collection tasks can be either mandatory for the users to 
finish the game or optional, as the
users can finish the game without collecting all the game items. The mandatory 
item collection tasks are related
with a structured visual search approach, whereas the optional item collection 
tasks are related with a free visual
search approach. Time Explorer and HoloTour are based on free visual search 
tasks, whereas Escape From the
Mummy’s Tomb is based on structured visual search tasks.

All games have been designed and developed by industry experts in collaboration 
with museum and cultural
heritage institutions. Time Explorer and Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb are 
web-based games deployed by the
British and Liverpool museums, respectively, with more than 200,000 players 
worldwide per year for each game.
HoloTour is a cultural heritage game based on mixed reality technology, 
provided by Microsoft. The aim of the
designers of each game is to engage the users within a playful activity and 
learn about a civilization (Time
Explorer: Ancient Egypt, Roman Empire, Imperial China, and Aztec Mexico (Aztec 
civilization was used for the
scope  of our study); Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb: Ancient Egypt; and 
HoloTour: Roman civilization and Inca
Empire (Inca Empire was used for the scope of our study)). An overview of the 
games is displayed in Table 1.

3.2.1    Time Explorer Provided  by  the  British  Museum. Time  Explorer  
(Figure  2,  left)  is  a  multiple  award–
winning  web-based single-player  game  provided  by  the  British  Museum.  It 
 is  a  multilevel  platform  action/
adventure game based on free visual search tasks. The objective of the player 
is to reach the final level and
obtain a valuable item, related to the Aztec civilization, by solving a riddle. 
While the players navigate through
the scene, aiming to reach the final level, they interact with various 
knowledge items, which provide them with


Fig. 2.  The games used in the studies: Time Explorer (left), Escape From the 
Mummy’s Tomb (middle), and HoloTour (right).

information about the Aztec civilization. Through the visual exploration of the 
scene, the players identify game
items as possible knowledge items, interact with them, and collect them. When 
the players collect an item, a
pop-up window is displayed. The window provides visual and textual information 
about the collected item. The
comprehension of the visual/textual information will help the players learn 
more about the Aztec civilization,
and                  it might be helpful when trying to solve the final riddle, 
to obtain the treasure and complete the game. Ob-
viously, the more knowledge items the players collect, the more information 
about Aztec civilization they have
access to.

3.2.2    Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb Provided by the Liverpool Museum. Escape 
From the Mummy’s Tomb
(Figure 2, middle) is a point-and-click adventure game provided by the 
Liverpool Museum. The game is based
on structured visual search tasks and consists of two stages. At the first 
stage, the player’s goal is to visually
explore a scene to find and collect nine knowledge items related to Ancient 
Egypt. When the users identify an
item as a knowledge item, they click on it and collect it. After collecting an 
item, a pop-up window provides
visual and textual information about the collected item. The comprehension of 
the visual/textual information
will help the players complete the second stage and finish the game. At the 
second stage, the players navigate
through the museum virtual scene, where they visually search for the case of 
each collected item. When clicking
on a case, they are asked to match the corresponding item. After placing an 
item into its case, the players answer
a question about the meaning of the item for the afterlife beliefs of Ancient 
Egyptians.

3.2.3    HoloTour by Microsoft. Microsoft HoloTour (Figure 2, right) is an 
audio-visual three-dimensional virtual
tourism application that allows the users to see and explore mixed reality 
environments for experiencing physical
places in space and time without physically traveling there. HoloTour users 
visit one of the available locations and
visually explore past and present scenes, enriched with digital content, 
providing a playful way to learn about the
civilization. In each location, there are hidden in-game assets that provide 
information about the Inca civilization.
When     the Inca world model loads, the players visually explore the 3D 
360-degree scene naturally. They visually
search for hidden items, and when they identify an item as a possible knowledge 
item, they interact with it via
voice command or gesture. When a knowledge item is activated, the players 
receive audio-visual information
about the meaning of the revealed item and its relation to the Inca and the 
Peruvian culture and traditions. Like
Time Explorer, HoloTour is based on free visual search tasks, as the collection 
of knowledge items by the players
is not mandatory for proceeding to the next levels.

3.3    Gameplay and Visual Behavior Metrics

As discussed, the games include visual search tasks; hence, the players’ 
behavior can be discerned as game-
play and visual behavior. To measure the gameplay behavior, various metrics can 
be used, depending on the
genre and the mechanics of the game (e.g., completion time, number of collected 
items, score). Time Explorer
is an action/adventure game that requires users to collect a number of items to 
build their knowledge and solve


Fig. 3.  In Time Explorer, there are several objects scattered within the game 
scene that represent knowledge items (e.g., Eagle
Warrior, stone owl, ceremonial knife). These items are the AOIs for our study, 
as they provide meaningful information about
the Aztec civilization when collected.

the final riddle in a given amount of time. Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb is a 
quiz/puzzle game that requires
users to place all collected items into their cases. HoloTour is an exploration 
game in which the players are en-
gaged in item search tasks. All games have item collection tasks; therefore, 
the primary gameplay metric is the
number of collected knowledge items.

Regarding the visual behavior metrics, we focused on fixations, which are the 
recommended eye movements
for visual exploration and search tasks [91], like the tasks in the study 
games. Fixations occur while individuals’
eyes are kept aligned with the target for a certain duration, allowing for the 
visual scene details to be processed.
Considering the nature of each game and following common practice [91], the 
visual behavior metrics are the
number    of fixated knowledge items and the fixation duration on those items. 
Each knowledge item provides
information about the civilization presented in each game, and thus it is 
critical for the knowledge acquisition
process,    as the players collect information about the civilization through 
finding and revealing such items. For
example, in Time Explorer, there is a game item that represents the Eagle 
Warrior. When the players click on
it,     they receive graphical and textual information about this special class 
of infantry soldier in the Aztec army.
Therefore, in our studies, each knowledge item is considered as an area of 
interest (AOI), in which the discussed
eye-tracking metrics are applied. As an example, we illustrate three such AOIs 
of Time Explorer in Figure 3.

3.4    Participants

We recruited 127 participants (Time Explorer: N = 46; Escape From the Mummy’s 
Tomb: N = 45; HoloTour: N = 36)
of varying age and gender (Table 2). Nineteen more participants were recruited, 
but they were removed due to
eye-tracking calibration or recording difficulties (Time Explorer: N = 4; 
Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb: N = 5;
HoloTour:   N = 10). To determine whether a participant is either FD or FI, we 
used the Group Embedded Figures
Test (GEFT) tool, which is the original FD-I elicitation instrument. The GEFT 
is a time-administered tool that
consists of a set of pattern recognition tasks of diverse complexity, in which 
the users are asked to identify and


Table 2.  Study Participants’ Demographics

Game                                                       Technology          
FD-I Group      N        Gender              Age            GEFT Score

Time Explorer                                       Desktop computer            
 FD             22       8 f/14 m       23.08 ± 4.76       8.58 ± 2.67

FI              24       9 f/15m       26.00 ± 5.74      14.69 ± 2.02

46     17 f /29 m     24.60 ± 5.44      11.76 ± 3.86

Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb        Tablet computer              FD             
23      10 f/13 m      27.32 ± 2.25       7.82 ± 2.08

FI              22      11 f/11 m      25.91 ± 3.82      14.91 ± 2.23

45     21 f /24 m     26.71 ± 2.98      11.24 ± 4.20

HoloTour                                                   Mixed reality        
         FD             18       8 f/10 m       29.58 ± 5.68       8.05 ± 2.79

FI              18       6 f/12m       31.84 ± 4.81      14.00 ± 1.81

                                                                                
                                          36     14 f /22 m     31.10 ± 5.41    
  11.03 ± 3.81

outline simple shapes within complex figures. The test consists of two main 
sections. Each section consists of nine
pattern recognition tasks, which the participants have to solve in 5 minutes. 
The score is calculated by summing
the correctly identified patterns; thus, the score range is between 0 and 18. 
The higher the score, the more FI the
subject is. Each of the participants undertook the GEFT; their scores ranged 
between 1 and 18 (Table 2), and they
were normally distributed according to the Shapiro-Wilk normality test (Time 
Explorer: p = .122; Escape From
the Mummy’s Tomb: p = .139; HoloTour: p = .472). The classification of each 
participant into either the FD or the
FI group was based on a cut-off score. The cut-off score was the mean score 
(i.e., 11), which has been widely used
in practice [17, 42, 90]. Therefore, the participants who scored 11 or lower 
were classified as FD and those who
scored from 12 to 18 as FI. At this point, we should mention that despite the 
sample limitations, the age span
and the gender distribution of the study sample reflect the age span and the 
gender distribution of the majority
of the gamers [75]. Moreveor, the GEFT scores are comparably similar to the 
general public across populations
with varying demographics [46, 47, 100].

3.5    Procedure

To investigate the null hypotheses, we conducted three experiments in a 6-month 
period study (from March to
September 2017). Each experiment consisted of seven stages: participants’ 
recruitment, cognitive style elicitation,
FD-I classification, pre-test knowledge, game playing, post-test knowledge, and 
data analysis.

Participants’ recruitment. We recruited the study participants using various 
methods, including personal
contacts, email requests, and social media announcements, aiming to engage 
people with different educational
and professional background, age, and interests. The study participants had to 
meet a set of minimum require-
ments: have never taken the GEFT; older than 18 years; know little or nothing 
about Aztec, Egyptian, and Inca
civilizations; have never played the games before; and have no vision problems. 
All the participants were in-
formed about the study and signed a consent form.

Cognitive style elicitation. We scheduled cognitive style elicitation sessions 
at times convenient to the par-
ticipants. The individuals in each session were first asked to complete a short 
questionnaire about demographic
information, and then they proceeded to the GEFT test session, which was 
facilitated by the researchers and had
a      duration of 15 minutes. During the administration of the GEFT test, the 
directions about the materials, the test
procedure, and the time limits described in the official scoring template were 
firmly followed.

FD-I classification. We analyzed the GEFT responses and calculated the raw 
scores for each participant.
Depending on their raw scores, the participants were classified either as FD or 
FI (Table 2). During the scoring of
the    GEFT test, we firmly followed the directions about the scoring as 
described in the official scoring template.
Pre-test knowledge: To measure the knowledge of the individuals regarding each 
civilization (i.e., Aztec,
Egyptian,  and  Inca  civilizations),  we  followed  a  pre-test/post-test  
questionnaire-based  design  approach.  We


developed a pre-test/post-test questionnaire for each game. The questions in 
each questionnaire reflected on
the information about the civilization presented in the game and provided 
during the gameplay (e.g., through
pop-up windows). The questionnaires had a high level of internal consistency 
(Time Explorer: .877; Escape From
the Mummy’s Tomb: .791; HoloTour: .802), according to the questionnaire ordinal 
alpha reliability analysis.

Game playing. Each game was played on the interaction device on which the game 
was intended to be played

seamlessly, aiming to improve our study validity. Hence, Time Explorer was 
played on a desktop computer (Intel
Core i7-4500U processor at 1.80GHz, 8GB installed RAM, LG Monitor 22-inch 
22MP48D at a screen resolution
of 1920  1080 pixels and frequency 50Hz); Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb was 
played on a tablet device (Sam-
sung Galaxy Tab 3.8 8-inch tablet at a screen resolution of 1280  800 pixels); 
HoloTour was played on Microsoft
HoloLens. To capture the participants’ eye-gaze behavior, we used Tobii Pro 
Glasses 2, which recorded the eye
movements with gaze sampling frequency at 50Hz. The fixations were extracted 
using the velocity threshold
identification (I-VT) algorithm provided by Tobii. A game playing session 
followed for each participant with no
time       limit. The study participants wore the Tobii Pro 2 glasses, and they 
were taken through the setup and cali-
bration process as described in the Tobii Pro 2 Glasses manual [117]. To 
improve the quality of the eye-tracking
analysis, we set a threshold of .85 for the gaze samples (calculated by 
dividing the number of eye tracking sam-
ples  that were correctly identified by the theoretical maximum), which is 
considered a good indicator for data
quality [41]. The data collected from participants who had difficulties during 
the calibration process or had a low
gaze-samples ratio were excluded from the analysis. All participants were 
explicitly informed about the options
they        had while playing. Next, they played the game (Aztec level for the 
Time Explorer game, the full game for
Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb, and Inca level for the HoloTour game).

Post-test knowledge . We used a post-test questionnaire to measure the 
knowledge that each participant
gained after playing the assigned game. Following common practice [2, 23, 24, 
126], the post-test and pre-test
questionnaires had similar questions. To avoid memorization and bias effects, 
the post-test questionnaire was
performed      1 week after the game playing session, which is an adequate time 
period to limit such effects [31, 34].
The participants were not aware that they would be asked to complete the 
post-test questionnaire.

Data analysis. We analyzed the collected data toward our research questions 
following statistical methods.

3.6    Study Validity

Regarding the internal validity, the study environment and the study procedure 
remained the same for all partic-
ipants. The statistical tests met all the required assumptions, as discussed in 
the next section, despite the rather
limited size of the sample. As discussed in Section 3.4, the age span and the 
gender distribution of the study
sample reflect the age span and the gender distribution of the majority of the 
gamers. Focusing on the study
instruments, we used the GEFT test to classify an individual as either FD or 
FI, based on a cut-off score. Con-
sidering  that the GEFT test highlights cognitive differences along a continuum 
scale, the use of a cut-off might
not classify correctly individuals who fall in between the two endpoints; thus, 
several studies [3, 6, 14, 63] use a
third dimension called field mixed to characterize individuals with a GEFT 
score close to the mean score of the
study sample. However, the dichotomous approach that adopts the mean score as 
the cut-off score is widely used
in the literature [17, 42, 46, 68, 70, 80]. Regarding the external validity, it 
is worth mentioning that several cul-
tural heritage activities are based on visual search and item collection tasks 
[27, 37, 82, 103]; thus, we anticipate
that similar findings will be replicated in the contexts of different 
activities. Regarding the ecological validity of
our studies, the game playing sessions took place at times and on days 
convenient for each participant. The lab
was transformed into a playroom, considering all the required technological 
resources (desktop computer, tablet
device, mixed reality apparatus, stable and high-speed Internet connection). 
The devices were powerful enough
to support the games and did not affect participants’ experience in the shade 
of poor performance. Regarding
HoloLens, none of the participants had previous experience with it, so they 
undertook a quick tutorial on how to
use         it. Regarding the eye-tracking apparatus, the individuals do not 
typically use such equipment when playing,


Fig. 4.  FIs fixated on more items than FDs when the game included free visual 
search tasks. When the game was based on
structured visual search tasks, no differences were revealed.

but the fact that the equipment was wearable glasses made them feel more 
comfortable after a while, as they
could interact with the system as they would normally do. At this point, we 
should mention that we removed
some participants from the analysis due to difficulties during the calibration 
process or poor quality of their
collected gaze samples, as discussed in Section 3.5. The research team 
conducted the study following the ACM
Code    of Ethics.

4    RESULTS

4.1    The Effect of FD-I on Visual Behavior

To investigate H0₁, we performed statistical tests toward visual behavior 
metrics: number of fixated game items
and fixation duration. Regarding the number of fixated game items (Figure 4), 
we performed a Mann-Whitney
U test for each game. The distributions of the number of fixated game items for 
FDs and FIs were similar, as
assessed by visual inspection. The analysis of results revealed that for Time 
Explorer, the median fixated game
items were significantly more for FIs (10) than FDs (8) (U = 179.500, z =   
2.598, p = .009, r = .383). FIs fixated
on 9.638    2.671 game items, whereas FDs fixated on 7.667    2.751 game items. 
For HoloTour, the median fixated
game items were significantly more for FIs (39) than FDs (33) (U = 43.000, z =  
 3.781, p < .005, r = .630). FIs
fixated on 38.833    3.445 game items, whereas FDs fixated on 33.445    3.126 
game items. No differences were
found for Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb, as the players had to collect all 9 
game items; thus, they fixated on
all   of them.

Regarding the fixation duration per game item (Figure 5), we performed an 
independent-samples t-test for

each game. After normalizing the fixation duration values for HoloTour 
according to the procedure provided by
Templeton [114], each test met the required assumptions. The analysis revealed 
that FIs fixated on the game
items for significantly longer time periods than FDs when playing Time Explorer 
(FIs: 4.291 ± 1.672 minutes,
FDs: 2.872 ± 2.031 minutes, t = 3.019, p = .028, d = .763), Escape From the 
Mummy’s Tomb (FIs: 8.036 ± 2.023

minutes, FDs: 6.637 ± 1.050 minutes, t = 2.875, p = .007, d = .870), and 
HoloTour (FIs: 27.217 ± 4.151 minutes,

FDs: 23.614 ± 4.007 minutes, t = 2.630, p = .014, d = .883).

4.2    The Effect of FD-I on Gameplay Behavior

To investigate H0₂, we performed a Mann-Whitney U test for each game (Figure 
6), which met all the required
assumptions. The analysis of the results revealed that for Time Explorer, the 
median collected items were signif-
icantly   more for FIs (8) than FDs (7) (FIs: 7.960    3.039 items, FDs: 6.292  
  2.596 items, U = 210.000, z =   2.000,
p      = .036, r = .295). For HoloTour, the median collected items were 
significantly more for FIs (37) than FDs (31)


Fig. 5.  FIs fixated on the game items for longer time periods than FDs for 
both free and structured visual search tasks,
indicating deeper visual information processing.

Fig. 6.  FIs collected significantly more items than FDs when the collection of 
the items was not mandatory for game progress.

(FIs: 37.173     3.683 items, FDs: 31.004     3.997 items, U = 37.000, z =   
3.976, p < .005, r = .663). There was no

difference between FDs and FIs who played Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb, as it 
was mandatory, by the game
rules, to collect all 9 knowledge items.

4.3    The Effect of FD-I on Knowledge Acquisition

To investigate H0₃, we performed a Mann-Whitney U test for each game (Figure 
7), which met all the required
assumptions. The analysis revealed that for Time Explorer, the median correct 
answers were significantly more
for         FIs (7) than FDs (5) (FDs: 5.583     1.248 correct answers, FIs: 
6.436     1.294 correct answers, U = 209.500,
z =   2.049, p = .040, r = .302). For Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb, the median 
correct answers of FIs (5) and
FDs (5) were not different (FDs: 5.167     1.090 correct answers, FIs; 5.333    
 1.065 correct answers, U = 234.000,
z   =   .426, p = .670). For HoloTour, the median correct answers were 
significantly more for FIs (7) than FDs (6)
(FDs: 5.722     .894 correct answers, FIs: 6.831     1.227, U = 79.500, z =   
2.708, p = .008, r = .451). Therefore,
FIs performed better than FDs in the knowledge post-test for games that are 
based on free visual search tasks,
whereas there was no significant difference for the game that is based on 
structured visual search tasks.

It is worth mentioning that regarding the knowledge that each participant had 
about the civilization presented
in the game they were assigned to play, both FDs and FIs showed low prior 
knowledge according to the analysis
of the pre-test questionnaire answers, as expected. FDs and FIs did not differ 
significantly in all game cases, as
assessed by Mann-Whitney U tests, which met all the required assumptions (Time 
Explorer: FIs: .402 ± .316, FDs:


Fig. 7.  For each game, the knowledge acquisition (in terms of correct answers) 
in the pre- and post-test are displayed. The
pre-test showed that the individuals had minimum knowledge of the history and 
culture of each civilization, whereas the
post-test showed that FIs performed better than FDs.

.541 ± .505, U = 297.000, z = .380, p = .704; Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb: 
FIS: .762 ± .623, FDs: .750 ± .727,

U = 297.000, z = .170, p = .861; HoloTour: FIS: 1.077 ± .854, FDs: .583 ± .468, 
U = 55.000, z = 1.342, p = .225).

4.4    Correlation Between Visual Behavior, Gameplay Behavior, and Knowledge 
Acquisition

To investigate H0₄, we performed a Pearson correlation test, which met all the 
required assumptions, for each
game. The results of the test for each game (Table 3) are discussed next.

Regarding Time Explorer, there is a strong correlation (r = .571, p = .006) 
between the gameplay behavior and

the knowledge acquisition. That means that the more items players collected, 
the more correct answers they
had on the post-test. The knowledge acquisition was also associated with the 
players’ visual behavior, as there
was a moderate correlation between the number of fixated items and the number 
of correct answers (r = .324,
p  = .022), and between fixation duration and the number of correct answers (r 
= .301, p = .034). Hence, the more
and longer fixations players performed on the game items, the more correct 
answers they had in the post-test
questionnaire. Moreover, the visual behavior is strongly associated with the 
gameplay behavior, as the more
fixations players developed, the more items they collected (r = .753, p = 
.002).

Regarding  Escape  From  the  Mummy’s  Tomb,  there  is  a  moderate  
correlation  (r = .331, p = .028)  between

the fixation duration and the knowledge acquisition. This means that the longer 
fixations players applied on
the Egyptian artifacts, the more likely they were to provide a correct answer 
to the post-test questions, thus the
more knowledge they would acquire about the beliefs and traditions of Ancient 
Egyptians about the afterlife.

Regarding HoloTour, there is a moderate correlation (r = .332, p = .038) 
between the number of the collected

items and the number of fixated items, meaning that the more items players 
fixated on, the more they collected.
Moreover, there is a strong correlation (r = .507, p = .002) between the number 
of the collected items and the
number of the correct answers in the post-test, meaning that the more items 
players collected, the more likely
they were to provide a correct answer to the post-test questions, thus the more 
knowledge they would acquire
about Inca civilization and Peruvian culture.

5    INTERPRETATION OF THE RESULTS

The findings discussed next are in correspondence with the research model 
illustrated in Figure 1. Thus, they are
presented in terms of the interplay among human cognition and visual behavior, 
human cognition and gameplay,
visual behavior and gameplay, and all factors on the knowledge acquisition. The 
inter-relationship among the
factors is depicted in Figure 8.


— Game designers’ decisions related to visual search tasks influenced FDs’ and 
FIs’ visual behavior. FDs and
FIs followed different visual strategies while playing free visual search games 
(i.e., games that expect
users to visually search a scene and identify cultural assets without being 
compulsory). FIs fixated on
more cultural game items (Figure 4) and for longer periods (Figure 5) than FDs; 
our findings reinforce
and validate the results of other studies [76, 91] and our work on cultural 
heritage gaming [89, 92, 94].
This behavior is a result from the FIs’ analytic nature and their skill to 
visually identify details within the
surrounding context [127], as they tend to follow a more investigative visual 
search approach, scanning
most           of the game scene. More and longer fixations imply better 
memorability [62, 123], higher volume of
information extracted and accumulated [123], and attention [98] in visual 
search tasks. Considering that
FIs             are more efficient at retrieving items from memory [3] than 
FDs, the fact that they produced more and
longer fixations on the critical game objects helped them focus more on and 
have a better comprehension
of   the information provided for each culture.

— Game designers’ decisions related to visual search tasks influenced FDs’ and 
FIs’ gameplay behavior. FDs and
FIs followed different game playing approaches (Figure 6). FIs collected more 
items than FDs when the
game included free visual search tasks, as they followed an analytical 
approach. FIs have an inherent skill
to identify critical visual information, as they tend to pay attention to 
details and can easily separate details
from the surrounding context [86]. While playing the free visual search games, 
FIs were interested in
exploring the game levels following an intrinsic self-motivated strategy, which 
is a result of their tendency
to develop self-structured objectives and perform independently out of the 
given rules [86]. However, FDs
did not interact with many game objects when the collection of the items was 
not mandatory to finish
the game. This could be attributed to the fact that FDs tend to strictly follow 
the guidelines and objectives
of the game (e.g., proceed to the final level and solve the riddle); thus, FDs 
collected fewer items than
FIs because it was not the main objective of the game and because of their 
holistic information search
approach [86].

— FDs’ and FIs’ visual behavior influenced their gameplay behavior. In free 
visual search tasks, the users’
visual behavior influenced their gameplay behavior (Table 3). The more 
knowledge items they fixated on,
the more items they collected, as they interacted with game items that drew 
their attention. Moreover,
the longer a player fixated on a game item, the more likely they were to 
interact with it and collect it,
as increased fixation duration timings indicate increased focus and attention 
[99, 123]. Therefore, the
designers’ decision to include knowledge items that draw the visual attention 
of the players for long time
periods influenced their gameplay behavior and helped them have wider access to 
knowledge, leading to
an increasing knowledge acquisition and implying a better learning outcome.

— Visual and gameplay behavior influenced knowledge acquisition on both 
cognitive style groups, but FIs were
unintentionally favored toward knowledge acquisition within free visual search 
and exploration game de-
signs. In free visual search games, FIs learned significantly more about 
ancient civilizations than FDs, as
they answered more post-test questions correctly (Figure 7). Users’ performance 
in the post-test was in-
fluenced by both the gameplay behavior and the visual behavior (Table 3). The 
design decision to include
free visual search tasks and the inherent difficulty of FDs to identify simple 
details within complex visual
context led FDs to fixate on and collect fewer crucial knowledge game items and 
thus hindered them
toward knowledge acquisition and, eventually, learning gain.

6    DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS

Our research findings suggest that specific design decisions related to digital 
visual activities unintentionally af-
fected the interactive behavior and thus the knowledge acquisition of 
individuals with different cognitive char-
acteristics. Considering that the increasing use of digital technologies in the 
cultural heritage domain makes
the evaluation process necessary, it is important for evaluation studies, such 
as the reported ones here, to take



Table 3.  Correlation Matrix

Time Explorer

Metric Type                              Metric                            (1)  
               (2)                 (3)           (4)

1     Visual behavior                 Number of fixated images                  
  1

2                                                Fixation duration              
         r = .182                   1

p = .

3     Gameplay behavior           Number of collected items          r = .753   
    r = .132                    1

p = .               p = .

4     Knowledge acquisition      Number of correct answers       r = .324       
 r = .301        r = .571        1

p = .              p = .             p = .

Escape From the Mummy’s Tomb

Metric Type                     Metric                                          
   (1)                 (2)                 (3)           (4)

1     Visual behavior                 Number of fixated images                 
1

2                                                Fixation duration              
             n/a                       1

3     Gameplay behavior           Number of collected items             n/a     
              n/a                1

4     Knowledge acquisition      Number of correct answers           n/a        
    r = .331            n/a            1

p = .028*

Microsoft HoloTour

Metric Type                                      Metric           (1)           
      (2)                 (3)           (4)

1     Visual behavior                 Number of fixated images                  
   1

2                                                Fixation duration              
         r = .136                   1

p = .431

3     Gameplay behavior           Number of collected items         r = .332    
    r = .147

p = .028*       p = .392                     1

4     Knowledge acquisition      Number of correct answers       r = .294       
 r = .179        r = .507

p = .082        p = .297      p = .002**      1

*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

n/a. Cannot be computed because at least one of the variables is constant.

Fig. 8.  Players’ characteristics toward FD-I influenced their visual and 
gameplay behavior and consequently had an impact
on the knowledge acquisition process.


into account the multidimensional nature of the cultural heritage domain and 
the cognitive characteristics of
its users (e.g., visitors) to guide the research in undiscovered paths. 
Considering human cognition as an evalua-
tion factor unravels the underlying reasons for imbalances in knowledge 
acquisition when individuals perform
cultural heritage activities that include information processing tasks. 
Therefore, evaluators are expected to ben-
efit when performing a cognition-centered evaluation by taking into account the 
visitors’ individual cognitive
characteristics, as it helps them better evaluate a cultural heritage activity 
toward its objectives. Focusing on the
evaluation studies discussed in this article, if we had not considered the FD-I 
cognitive style as an evaluation
factor,   we would have observed an average knowledge acquisition in free 
visual search tasks, but we would not
have been able to understand the underlying reasons for the observed outcome. 
This could lead not only to inac-
curate interpretation of the findings but also to wrong design recommendations 
and guidelines (e.g., avoid free
visual search tasks). By considering cognitive characteristics as an evaluation 
factor, we revealed a new dimen-
sion of the individuals’ diversity and gained a deeper understanding of the 
reasons an activity meets (or not) its
objectives.

The “one-size-fits-all” approach is not the optimal way to deliver meaningful 
cultural experiences to the end-
users (e.g., visitors), and through the cognition-centered evaluation, cultural 
heritage stakeholders will not only
identify the differences in knowledge acquisition between users with different 
cognitive characteristics when in-
teracting with cultural heritage resources but will also understand the 
underlying reasons for these differences
and better interpret them. Therefore, the cognition-centered evaluation points 
out the importance of considering
what task types (e.g., free or structured visual search) would fit better to 
each activity context and user cognitive
profile within the cultural heritage domain. However, there are cases where the 
imbalance of the knowledge ac-
quisition may not relate only to the visualization of the content or the task 
type but to other factors as well, such
as      the content per se. For example, for individuals who process visual 
information more efficiently than verbal
information (e.g., Visualizer-Verbalizer cognitive style), the content should 
be provided in graphical form; for in-
dividuals who process verbal information more efficiently, the content should 
be provided in textual form [97].
The activity type (e.g., games vs. narratives) should also be considered as an 
evaluation parameter, as different
types of activities favor individuals with different cognitive characteristics 
[116]. It is worth mentioning that the
discussed implications apply not only to games but also to cultural heritage 
activities that include information
processing tasks, such as virtual tours and guides, which have also been shown 
to be influenced by cognitive
characteristics [95]. Moreover, in our studies, we focused only on visual 
interactions; however, cultural heritage
activities    can also include audio-based and spatial interactions, such as 
storytelling and location-aware applica-
tions. Hence, there is a need for investigating whether other cognitive 
characteristics (e.g., auditory cognitive
styles) influence visitors’ behavior and experience in such contexts. The 
summarized lessons learned from our
research are as follows:

— Cognition-centered evaluation of digital cultural heritage activities and 
resources helped us better un-
derstand the underlying reasons for explaining the different behavioral 
patterns among individuals with
different cognitive characteristics.

— Cognition-centered evaluation interconnects diverse aspects of the 
information processing approach (e.g.,
visual information seeking, comprehension of information) with human cognition 
(e.g., style, skills), and
thus it helps us effectively assess the end-users’ experience and propose ways 
to improve it based on the
end-users’ cognitive preferences and needs.

— Cognition-centered evaluation points out the importance of considering what 
task types (e.g., free or
structured visual search) would fit better to each activity context and user 
cognitive profile within the
cultural heritage domain.

— Cognition-centered evaluation takes into consideration various aspects of the 
cultural heritage resources,
as it is strongly associated not only with the task types but also with the 
visualization mechanisms, the
high-level activity types, the modes of interaction, and so forth.


— Cognition-centered evaluation contributes to the better and deeper 
understanding of the importance and
the necessity of the evaluation process to assess and aim for a better impact 
on the end-users’ experience
(e.g., visitors’ experience) both in the short- and the long term, considering 
that cognitive characteristics
(e.g., cognitive style) rarely change throughout the life span.

In human-centered design, evaluation is used, among others, to drive the design 
or the refinement of informa-
tion systems. Therefore, the interpretation of the findings of our evaluation 
studies could lead to the formation or
optimization of specific sets of recommendations and rules for designing and 
adapting cultural heritage activities
to      support the diverse information processing requirements of users with 
different cognitive characteristics and
best serve them toward information comprehension and knowledge acquisition. 
Focusing on the FD-I cognitive
style, FDs have difficulties in recognizing details in complex visual contexts, 
and thus they might miss valuable
information, such as items that provide information about an ancient 
civilization, when performing free visual
search  tasks. Therefore, in activities that are based on free visual search 
tasks, the system should aim to help FDs
access such information. This can be achieved by adopting various techniques:

— Considering that FDs benefit when the information is provided with light 
recoloring [32] or a saliency
effect [49], such an alternative visualization could be provided for the 
activity items/regions that provide
critical information about the civilization/culture presented in the activity.

— To increase fixation duration and keep the users’ attention within critical 
areas of interest, the whole
scene could be blurred, except the knowledge items. The blur effect is an 
adequate technique to keep
users’ focus on specific areas of interest [46], and it can be activated when 
an FD user approaches a
knowledge item within a predefined distance.

— The system could support a sequential dual approach for activities that 
support both structured and free
search tasks. In this approach, all the tasks are based on structured search, 
until a threshold is reached.
The threshold can be the collection of specific items, the collection of a 
predefined number of items, and
so forth. After the threshold is reached, the tasks are transformed into visual 
free search tasks, aiming to
trigger self-efficacy and autonomy of the users, which help the knowledge 
acquisition process [105, 133].

— In item collection activities, there are items that are important for users 
to build knowledge and items
that are complementary. Therefore, the collection of the important items could 
be based on structured
search, whereas the collection of the complementary could be based on free 
search.

Therefore, evaluation studies like those reported herein provide insights into 
which mechanisms better en-
able users with different cognitive characteristics to meet the activity’s 
objective. Considering that specific task
types may not benefit users with specific cognitive characteristics [96], 
suitable assistive mechanisms can be
introduced to ensure that the users will discover the intended content. To 
support such diverse mechanisms, tai-
lored       to specific cognitive characteristics, the cultural heritage 
designers should provide adaptive interventions
for personalized access to cultural information. The cultural heritage activity 
should be adapted to the cogni-
tive characteristics of each user. The adaptation can be achieved through the 
use of varying techniques, such
as rules-based adaptation. Following a rules-based adaptation approach, the 
rules implement visual information
functionalities and content presentation mechanics, tailored to the users’ 
cognitive characteristics. The rules
derive     from studies like those reported herein. For example, in free visual 
search tasks, recoloring or saliency
effects could be applied to the knowledge items when an FD user performs the 
activity. Therefore, the cognition-
centered evaluation builds the rules set that can be used to adapt the cultural 
activity to the unique cognitive
preferences and needs of each user.

Considering the nature of the cultural heritage domain where many end-users are 
considered as first-time
users, as they interact with a digital cultural heritage resource for the first 
time (and maybe the only time in
their life), we point out the importance of runtime and dynamic adaptation of 
cognition-centered interventions
in digital cultural heritage activities. To deliver such runtime 
cognition-centered personalized activities, it is


essential not only to adapt the cultural heritage activity in runtime (which 
has been adequately addressed in
other works in the cultural heritage domain, such as in Stock et al. [110]) but 
also to elicit the user’s cognitive
profile (e.g., cognitive style) in real time within the very first stages of 
the activity, when the user experience is
not yet fully shaped, to adapt the content adequately and seamlessly and ensure 
that the adaptation mechanism
does not affect the user experience after it is established. Considering that 
the current elicitation tools (e.g., the
GEFT) are not practical for runtime adaptation, as they are based on explicit 
and time-consuming processes that
require human interference, we can use eye-tracking methods [96] to elicit the 
users’ cognitive profiles implicitly
in the very early stages of the activity, given that our research showed that 
there is a correlation between the
visual behavior and the cognitive characteristics. The elicitation can be 
performed in tutorial levels before the
users play the cultural heritage game, so as to not influence the gaming 
experience.

Finally, the high-level implication of our research is that there is a 
necessity to adopt a cognition-centered
framework for both design and evaluation purposes, which (a) elicits, stores, 
and maintains cognition-centered
user models through implicit elicitation and (b) adapts cultural activities 
based on recommendations and rules
exported by evaluation studies such as those reported herein aiming to deliver 
the most optimized personalized
cultural heritage experience to each individual user. The cognition-centered 
framework will help the (a) eval-
uators effectively assess digital cultural heritage activities and resources to 
craft a better understanding of the
end-users’ interactive behavior and stress out differences in information 
seeking approaches, which could lead
to imbalances toward the activity objectives; (b) designers to craft 
personalized cultural heritage activities that
are tailored to the end-users’ unique cognitive characteristics; and (c) 
end-users to have an enhanced experience,
a better comprehension of the presented information, an increased knowledge 
acquisition, and, eventually, an
increased learning gain. Considering that several stakeholders are involved in 
the cultural heritage domain (e.g.,
visitors, evaluators, designers, curators, institutions), the 
cognition-centered framework is expected to identify
the needs and interests of each stakeholder in the ecosystem, along with the 
interdependencies, and provide the
best-fitted and most influential cultural heritage activities and resources.

7    CONCLUSION

In this article, we evaluated whether and how game designers’ decisions related 
to visual search activities affect
knowledge acquisition in cultural heritage games by adopting a human cognitive 
perspective. We conducted
three between-subjects eye-tracking user studies. In total, 127 participants 
were classified as either FD or FI,
based on their performance on the GEFT. For each study, the participants formed 
two groups, according to their
cognitive style, and played a popular cultural heritage game (Time Explorer: N 
= 46; Escape From the Mummy’s
Tomb: N = 45; HoloTour N = 36). The quantitative analysis revealed that game 
designers’ decisions with regard
to visual search favored FIs and hindered FDs toward knowledge acquisition. In 
particular, FDs and FIs followed
different approaches to process visual information in free visual search tasks 
(i.e., tasks where the users visually
explore a scene and interact with items without being compulsory by the 
activity rules), which led to an un-
intentional knowledge acquisition imbalance. However, in structured visual 
search tasks (i..e, the activity rules
force     the players to visually search and collect a specific number of 
items), there was no knowledge imbalance
between FDs and FIs, as all users were enforced to collect the same items and 
thus access the same level of critical
information.

The findings of the study highlight the effects of human cognition on visual 
information search within cul-
tural heritage contexts and necessitate the support of individuals with 
specific cognitive characteristics (e.g.,
FDs) in playful interaction activities that include information search and 
comprehension tasks. Cultural heritage
stakeholders should consider the individual cognitive characteristics both in 
the design phase and the evalua-
tion      phase when delivering cultural activities, aiming to provide their 
users with personalized access to cultural
information and help them improve their learning gain and experience. We 
envision that cognition-centered
personalization mechanisms could be used by cultural heritage stakeholders to 
adapt cultural experiences to the


cognitive characteristics of their users (e.g., museum visitors). Such 
personalization mechanisms would mitigate
the observed imbalance and would help the users improve their knowledge 
acquisition gain when engaged with
cultural heritage activities. Considering that we move toward more immersive 
technologies (e.g., mixed reality),
we anticipate that such cognition-centered personalized experiences will help 
the users even more, as they have
been found to amplify the effects of cognitive differences [36, 40, 94].

REFERENCES

[1]   Sultan A. Alharthi, George E. Raptis, Christina Katsini, Igor Dolgov, 
Lennart E. Nacke, and Zachary O. Toups. 2018. Toward under-
standing the effects of cognitive styles on collaboration in multiplayer games. 
In Companion of the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW’18). ACM, New York, NY, 
169–172. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3272973.
3274047

[2]   Panagiota  Altanopoulou,  Nikolaos  Tselios,  Christos  Katsanos,  Maria  
Georgoutsou,  and  Maria-Antonia  Panagiotaki.  2015.  Wiki-
mediated activities in higher education: Evidence-based analysis of learning 
effectiveness across three studies. Journal of Educational
Technology and Society 18, 4 (Oct. 2015), 511–522.

[3]   Arif Altun and Mehtap Cakan. 2006. Undergraduate students’ academic 
achievement, field dependent/independent cognitive styles
and attitude toward computers. Educational Technology and Society 9, 1 (2006), 
289–297.

[4]   Eike Falk Anderson, Leigh McLoughlin, Fotis Liarokapis, Christopher 
Peters, Panagiotis Petridis, and Sara de Freitas. 2010. Developing
serious games for cultural heritage: A state-of-the-art review. Virtual Reality 
14, 4 (Dec. 2010), 255–275. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10055-010-0177-3

[5]   Charoula Angeli. 2013. Examining the effects of field 
dependence-independence on learners’ problem-solving performance and inter-
action with a computer modeling tool: Implications for the design of joint 
cognitive systems. Computers and Education 62 (Mar. 2013),
221–230. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2012.11.002

[6]   Charoula Angeli, Nicos Valanides, and Paul Kirschner. 2009. Field 
dependence-independence and instructional-design effects on
learners’ performance with a computer-modeling tool. Computers  in  Human  
Behavior  25, 6 (Nov. 2009), 1355–1366. DOI:https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2009.05.010

[7]   Charoula Angeli, Nicos Valanides, Eirini Polemitou, and Elena 
Fraggoulidou. 2016. An interaction effect between young children’s
field dependence-independence and order of learning with glass-box and 
black-box simulations: Evidence for the malleability of
cognitive style in computer-supported learning. Computers in Human Behavior 61 
(Aug. 2016), 569–583. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.chb.2016.03.060

[8]   Angeliki Antoniou, Dimitris Diakakis, George Lepouras, and Costas 
Vassilakis. 2011. Towards a methodological framework for the
cognitive-behavioural evaluation of educational E-Games. International Journal 
of Learning Technology 6, 3 (Nov. 2011), 263–287.

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1504/IJLT.2011.043580

[9]   Angeliki Antoniou and George Lepouras. 2010. Modeling visitors’ profiles: 
A study to investigate adaptation aspects for museum
learning technologies. ACM Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage 3, 2 
(Sep. 2010), 1–19. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1841317.
1841322

[10]   Angeliki Antoniou, George Lepouras, Stavroula Bampatzia, and Hera 
Almpanoudi. 2013. An approach for serious game development
for cultural heritage: Case study for an archaeological site and museum. ACM 
Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage 6, 4 (Nov.
2013), 1–19. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2532630.2532633

[11]   Carmelo Ardito and Rosa Lanzilotti. 2008. ”Isn’t this archaeological 
site exciting!”: A mobile system enhancing school trips. In Pro-
ceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (AVI’08). ACM, 
New York, NY, 488–489. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/
1385569.1385670

[12]   Sylvester Arnab, Panagiotis Petridis, Ian Dunwell, and Sara de Freitas. 
2011. Enhancing learning in distributed virtual worlds through
touch: A browser-based architecture for haptic interaction. In Serious Games 
and Edutainment Applications, M. Ma, A. Oikonomou,
and   L. C. Jain (Eds.). Springer London, London, UK, 149–167. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-2161-9_9

[13]   Sylvester Arnab, Panagiotis Petridis, Ian Dunwell, and Sara De Freitas. 
2011. Tactile interaction in an ancient world on a web browser.

International Journal of Computer Information Systems and Industrial Management 
Applications 3, 2011, 687–695.

[14]   Mehmet Bahar and Mike H. Hansell. 2000. The relationship between some 
psychological factors and their effect on the performance
of grid questions and word association tests. Educational Psychology 20, 3 
(Sep. 2000), 349–364. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/713663739

[15]   Rafael Ballagas, André Kuntze, and Steffen P. Walz. 2008. Gaming 
tourism: Lessons from evaluating REXplorer, a pervasive game
for tourists. In Pervasive Computing, J. Indulska, D. J. Patterson, T. Rodden, 
and M. Ott (Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Germany, 244–261.

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-79576-6_15

[16]   Stavroula Bampatzia, Ioannis Bourlakos, Angeliki Antoniou, Costas 
Vassilakis, George Lepouras, and Manolis Wallace. 2016. Serious
games: Valuable tools for cultural heritage. In Games and Learning Alliance, R. 
Bottino, J. Jeuring, and R. C. Veltkamp (Eds.). Springer
International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 331–341. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50182-6_30


[17]   Marios Belk, Christos Fidas, Panagiotis Germanakos, and George Samaras. 
2017. The interplay between humans, technology and user
authentication: A cognitive processing perspective. Computers in Human Behavior 
76, C (Nov. 2017), 184–200. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.chb.2017.06.042

[18]   Francesco Bellotti, Riccardo Berta, Alessandro De Gloria, Annamaria 
D’ursi, and Valentina Fiore. 2012. A serious game model for
cultural heritage. ACM Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage 5, 4 (Oct. 
2012), 1–27. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2399180.2399185

[19]   Francesco Bellotti, Riccardo Berta, Alessandro De Gloria, and Victor 
Zappi. 2008. Exploring gaming mechanisms to enhance knowl-
edge acquisition in virtual worlds. In Proceedings of the 3rd International 
Conference on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and
Arts (DIMEA’08). ACM, New York, NY, 77–84. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1413634.1413653

[20]   Jorge Simarro Cabrera, Henar Muñoz Frutos, Adrian G. Stoica, Nikolaos 
Avouris, Yannis Dimitriadis, Georgios Fiotakis, et al. 2005.
Mystery in the museum: Collaborative learning activities using handheld 
devices. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference
on Human Computer Interaction With Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI’05). 
ACM, New York, NY, 315–318. DOI:https://doi.org/
10.1145/1085777.1085843

[21]   Brian Cameron and Francis Dwyer. 2005. The effect of online gaming, 
cognition and feedback type in facilitating delayed achievement
of different learning objectives. Journal of Interactive Learning Research 16, 
3 (2005), 243–258.

[22]   James J. Canelos, William D. Taylor, and Robin B. Gates. 1980. The 
effects of three levels of visual stimulus complexity on the in-
formation processing of field-dependents and field-independents when acquiring 
information for performance on three types of
instructional objectives. Journal of Instructional Psychology 7, 2 (1980), 
65–70.

[23]   Ben Chang, Sherry Y. Chen, and Sin-Ni Jhan. 2015. The influences of an 
interactive group-based videogame: Cognitive styles vs. prior
ability. Computers and Education 88, C (Oct. 2015), 399–407. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2015.08.006

[24]   Kuo-En Chang, Chia-Tzu Chang, Huei-Tse Hou, Yao-Ting Sung, Huei-Lin 
Chao, and Cheng-Ming Lee. 2014. Development and be-
havioral pattern analysis of a mobile guide system with augmented reality for 
painting appreciation instruction in an art museum.

Computers and Education 71 (Feb. 2014), 185–197. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2013.09.022

[25]   Sherry Y. Chen and Xiaohui Liu. 2008. An integrated approach for 
modeling learning patterns of students in web-based instruction:
A cognitive style perspective. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 
15, 1 (May 2008), Article 1, 28 pages. DOI:https://
doi.org/10.1145/1352782.1352783

[26]   Susan Coates, Mae Lord, and Evelyn Jakabovics. 1975. Field 
dependence-independence, social-non-social play and sex differences in
preschool children. Perceptual and Motor Skills 40, 1 (Feb. 1975), 195–202. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.2466/pms.1975.40.1.195

[27]   Tanguy Coenen, Lien Mostmans, and Kris Naessens. 2013. MuseUs: Case 
study of a pervasive cultural heritage serious game. ACM
Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage 6, 2 (May 2013), Article 8, 19 
pages. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2460376.2460379

[28]   Guillaume Denis and Pierre Jouvelot. 2005. Motivation-driven educational 
game design: Applying best practices to music education.
In Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCHI International Conference on Advances in 
Computer Entertainment Technology (ACE’05). ACM,

New York, NY, 462–465. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1178477.1178581

[29]   Eyal Dim and Tsvi Kuflik. 2014. Automatic detection of social behavior 
of museum visitor pairs. ACM Transactions on Interactive
Intelligent Systems 4, 4 (Nov. 2014), 1–30. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2662869

[30]   Antoaneta L. Dimitrova and Bernard Steunenberg. 2017. The power of 
implementers: A three-level game model of compliance with
EU policy and its application to cultural heritage. Journal of European Public 
Policy 24, 8 (2017), 1211–1232. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1080/13501763.2016.1223156

[31]   Anne L. Dunnewold. 2014. Thought field therapy efficacy following large 
scale traumatic events. Current Research in Psychology 5, 1
(Jan. 2014), 34–39. DOI:https://doi.org/10.3844/crpsp.2014.34.39

[32]   Francis M. Dwyer and David M. Moore. 1992. Effect of color coding on 
visually and verbally oriented tests with students of dif-
ferent field dependence levels. Journal of Educational Technology Systems 20, 4 
(June 1992), 311–320. DOI:https://doi.org/10.2190/
T0EY-KF0H-0RTV-X5DG

[33]   Maria Economou and Laia Pujol-Tost. 2011. Evaluating the use of virtual 
reality and multimedia applications for presenting the
past. In Handbook of Research on Technologies and Cultural Heritage. IGI 
Global, Hershey, PA, 223–239. DOI:https://doi.org/10.4018/
978-1-60960-044-0.ch011

[34]   Warwick B. Elley. 1989. Vocabulary acquisition from listening to 
stories. Reading Research Quarterly 24, 2 (1989), 174–187. DOI:

https://doi.org/10.2307/747863

[35]   Carol Evans, John T. E. Richardson, and Michael Waring. 2013. Field 
independence: Reviewing the evidence. British Journal of Educa-
tional Psychology 83, 2 (June 2013), 210–224. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/bjep.12015

[36]   Joseph R. Fanfarelli and Rudy McDaniel. 2015. Individual differences in 
digital badging: Do learner characteristics matter?Journal of
Educational Technology Systems 43, 4 (June 2015), 403–428. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/0047239515588165

[37]   Josef Froschauer, Dieter Merkl, Max Arends, and Doron Goldfarb. 2013. 
Art history concepts at play with ThIATRO. ACM Journal on
Computing and Cultural Heritage 6, 2 (May 2013), Article 7, 15 pages. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2460376.2460378

[38]   Josef Froschauer, Ingo Seidel, Markus Gartner, Helmut Berger, and Dieter 
Merkl. 2010. Design and evaluation of a serious game for
immersive cultural training. In Proceedings of the 16th International 
Conference on Virtual Systems and Multimedia (VSMM’10). IEEE,
Los Alamitos, CA, 253–260. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/VSMM.2010.5665978


[39]   Dina Goren-Bar, Ilenia Graziola, Fabio Pianesi, and Massimo Zancanaro. 
2006. The influence of personality factors on visitor atti-
tudes towards adaptivity dimensions for mobile museum guides. User Modeling and 
User-Adapted Interaction 16, 1 (Mar. 2006), 31–62.

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-006-9004-7

[40]   David Hecht and Miriam Reiner. 2007. Field dependency and the sense of 
object-presence in haptic virtual environments. CyberPsy-
chology and Behavior 10, 2 (Apr. 2007), 243–251. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1089/cpb.2006.9962

[41]   Kenneth Holmqvist, Marcus Nyström, and Fiona Mulvey. 2012. Eye tracker 
data quality: What it is and how to measure it. In Proceed-
ings of the Symposium on Eye Tracking Research and Applications (ETRA’12). ACM, 
New York, NY, 45–52. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/
2168556.2168563

[42]   Jon-Chao Hong, Ming-Yueh Hwang, Ker-Ping Tam, Yi-Hsuan Lai, and Li-Chun 
Liu. 2012. Effects of cognitive style on digital jigsaw
puzzle performance: A gridware analysis. Computers in Human Behavior 28, 3 
(2012), 920–928. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2011.
12.012

[43]   Ming-Shiunn Huang and Brian Byrne. 1978. Cognitive style and lateral eye 
movements. British Journal of Psychology 69, 1 (Feb. 1978),
85–90. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8295.1978.tb01635.x

[44]   Jeffrey Jacobson. 2011. Digital dome versus desktop display in an 
educational game: Gates of Horus. International Journal of Gaming
and Computer-Mediated Simulations 3, 1 (2011), 13–32. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.4018/jgcms.2011010102

[45]   Christina Katsini, Christos Fidas, Marios Belk, Nikolaos Avouris, and 
George Samaras. 2017. Influences of users’ cognitive strategies
on graphical password composition. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA’17). ACM, New York, NY, 2698–2705. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3053217

[46]   Christina Katsini, Christos Fidas, George E. Raptis, Marios Belk, George 
Samaras, and Nikolaos Avouris. 2018. Influences of human
cognition and visual behavior on password strength during picture password 
composition. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’18). ACM, New York, NY, Article 87, 14 
pages. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173661

[47]   Mohammad Khatib and Rasoul Mohammad Hosseinpur. 2011. On the validity of 
the group embedded figure test (GEFT). Journal of
Language Teaching and Research 2, 3 (May 2011), 640–648. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.4304/jltr.2.3.640-648

[48]   Hayun Kim, Sungeun An, Sangeun Keum, and Wontack Woo. 2015. H-treasure 
hunt: A location and object-based serious game for
cultural heritage learning at a historic site. In Learning and Collaboration 
Technologies, P. Zaphiris and A. Ioannou (Eds.). Springer
International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 561–572.

[49]   Kyung-Sun Kim. 2001. Implications of user characteristics in information 
seeking on the World Wide Web. International Journal of
Human-Computer Interaction 13, 3 (Sep. 2001), 323–340. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327590IJHC1303_3

[50]   Eric Klopfer, Judy Perry, Kurt Squire, Ming-Fong Jan, and Constance 
Steinkuehler. 2005. Mystery at the museum: A collaborative
game for museum education. In Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on Computer 
Support for Collaborative Learning: Learning 2005: The
Next 10 Years! (CSCL’05). 316–320. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1149293.1149334

[51]   Chih-Hung Ko, Gin-Chung Liu, Sigmund Hsiao, Ju-Yu Yen, Ming-Jen Yang, 
Wei-Chen Lin, et al. 2009. Brain activities associated with
gaming urge of online gaming addiction. Journal of Psychiatric Research 43, 7 
(Apr. 2009), 739–747. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jpsychires.2008.09.012

[52]   Maria Kozhevnikov. 2007. Cognitive styles in the context of modern 
psychology: Toward an integrated framework of cognitive style.

Psychological Bulletin 133, 3 (May 2007), 464–481. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.133.3.464

[53]   Tsvi Kuflik, Oliviero Stock, Massimo Zancanaro, Ariel Gorfinkel, Sadek 
Jbara, Shahar Kats, et al. 2011. A visitor’s guide in an active
museum: Presentations, communications, and reflection. ACM Journal on Computing 
and Cultural Heritage 3, 3 (Mar. 2011), 1–25.

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1921614.1921618

[54]   Joel Lanir, Peter Bak, and Tsvi Kuflik. 2014. Visualizing 
proximity-based spatiotemporal behavior of museum visitors using tangram
diagrams. Computer Graphics Forum 33, 3 (June 2014), 261–270. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12382

[55]   Joel Lanir, Tsvi Kuflik, Julia Sheidin, Nisan Yavin, Kate Leiderman, and 
Michael Segal. 2017. Visualizing museum visitors’ behavior:
Where do they go and what do they do there?Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 
21, 2 (Apr. 2017), 313–326. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00779-016-0994-9

[56]   Joel Lanir, Alan J. Wecker, Tsvi Kuflik, and Yasmin Felberbaum. 2016. 
Shared mobile displays: An exploratory study of their use in a
museum setting. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 20, 4 (Aug. 2016), 635–651. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-016-0931-y

[57]   Nicola Lercari, Michela Mortara, and Maurizio Forte. 2014. Unveiling 
California history through serious games: Fort Ross virtual
warehouse. In Games  and  Learning  Alliance, A. De Gloria (Ed.). Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 236–251.

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-12157-4_19

[58]   Fotis Liarokapis, Panagiotis Petridis, Daniel Andrews, and Sara de 
Freitas. 2017. Multimodal serious games technologies for cultural
heritage. In Mixed Reality and Gamification for Cultural Heritage, M. 
Ioannides, N. Magnenat-Thalmann, and G. Papagiannakis (Eds.).

Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 371–392. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-49607-8_15

[59]   Tze Wei Liew and Sazilah Salam. 2012. The effects of visual cues and 
learners’ field dependence in multiple external representations
environment for novice program comprehension. Journal of Interactive Learning 
Research 23, 2 (2012), 165–189.

[60]   Tze Wei Liew, Su-Mae Tan, and Rouzbeh Seydali. 2014. Learners’ field 
dependence and the effects of personalized narration on learners’
computer perceptions and task-related attitudes in multimedia learning. Journal 
of Educational Technology Systems 42, 3 (Mar. 2014),
255–272. DOI:https://doi.org/10.2190/ET.42.3.e


[61]   María  Teresa  Linaza,  David  Marimón,  Paula  Carrasco,  Roberto  
Álvarez,  Javier  Montesa,  Salvador  Ramón  Aguilar,  et  al.  2012.
Evaluation of mobile augmented reality applications for tourism destinations. 
In Information and Communication Technologies in
Tourism  2012,  M.  Fuchs,  F.  Ricci,  and  L.  Cantoni  (Eds.).  Springer  
Vienna,  Vienna,  Austria,  260–271.  DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-7091-1142-0_23

[62]   Geoffrey R. Loftus. 1972. Eye fixations and recognition memory for 
pictures. Cognitive Psychology 3, 4 (Oct. 1972), 525–551. DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(72)90021-7

[63]   Chin-Hsieh Lu, Jon-Chou Hong, and Pei-Hsiu Huang. 2007. The effects of 
individual characteristics on children’s problem solving
performances in the context of game-based learning. In Proceedings of 
Redesigning Pedagogy: Culture, Knowledge and Understanding
Conference.

[64]   Fei Lu, Feng Tian, Yingying Jiang, Xiang Cao, Wencan Luo, Guang Li, et 
al. 2011. ShadowStory: Creative and collaborative digital
storytelling inspired by cultural heritage. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’11).

ACM, New York, NY, 1919–1928. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979221

[65]   Dane M. Chapman and Judith G. Calhoun2006. Validation of learning style 
measures: Implications for medical education practice.

Medical Education 40, 6 (May 2006), 576–583. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2929.2006.02476.x

[66]   Irini Malegiannaki and Thanasis Daradoumis. 2017. Analyzing the 
educational design, use and effect of spatial games for cultural
heritage: A literature review. Computers and Education 108 (May 2017), 1–10. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2017.01.007

[67]   Stefano Mastandrea, Gabriella Bartoli, and Giuseppe Bove. 2009. 
Preferences for ancient and modern art museums: Visitor experiences
and personality characteristics. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the 
Arts 3, 3 (Aug. 2009), 164–173. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0013142

[68]   Franco Mawad, Marcela Trías, Ana Giménez, Alejandro Maiche, and Gastón 
Ares. 2015. Influence of cognitive style on informa-
tion processing and selection of yogurt labels: Insights from an eye-tracking 
study. Food Research International 74 (Aug. 2015), 1–9.

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2015.04.023

[69]   Richard E. Mayer and Laura J. Massa. 2003. Three facets of visual and 
verbal learners: Cognitive ability, cognitive style, and learning
preference. Journal of Educational Psychology 95, 4 (Dec. 2003), 833–846. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.95.4.833

[70]   Rudy McDaniel and Robert Kenny. 2013. Evaluating the relationship 
between cognitive style and pre-service teachers’ preconceived
notions about adopting console video games for use in future classrooms. 
International Journal of Game-Based Learning 3, 2 (2013),
55–76. DOI:https://doi.org/10.4018/ijgbl.2013040104

[71]   Zdenek Mikovec, Pavel Slavik, and Jiri Zara. 2009. Cultural heritage, 
user interfaces and serious games at CTU Prague. In Proceedings
of the 15th International Conference on Virtual Systems and Multimedia 
(VSMM’15). IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA, 211–216. DOI:https://
doi.org/10.1109/VSMM.2009.38

[72]   Michela Mortara, Chiara Eva Catalano, Francesco Bellotti, Giusy Fiucci, 
Minica Houry-Panchetti, and Panagiotis Petridis. 2014. Learn-
ing cultural heritage by serious games. Journal of Cultural Heritage 15, 3 
(2014), 318–325. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.culher.2013.
04.004

[73]   Yannick Naudet, Angeliki Antoniou, Ioanna Lykourentzou, Eric Tobias, 
Jenny Rompa, and George Lepouras. 2015. Museum person-
alization based on gaming and cognitive styles. International Journal of 
Virtual Communities and Social Networking 7, 2 (Apr. 2015),
1–30. DOI:https://doi.org/10.4018/IJVCSN.2015040101

[74]   João N. Neto, Ricardo Silva, João P. Neto, João Madeiras Pereira, and 
João Fernandes. 2011. Solis’curse—A cultural heritage game
using voice interaction with a virtual agent. In Proceedings of the 3rd 
International Conference on Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious
Applications (VS-Games’11). IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA, 164–167. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/VS-GAMES.2011.31

[75]   Newzoo. 2017. Gamer Consumer Insights. Technical Report. Newzoo.

[76]   Efi Nisiforou and Andrew Laghos. 2016. Field dependence-independence and 
eye movement patterns: Investigating users’ differences
through an eye tracking study. Interacting with Computers 28, 4 (June 2016), 
407–420. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1093/iwc/iwv015

[77]   Mania Nosratinia and Shirin Adibifar. 2014. The effect of teaching 
metacognitive strategies on field-dependent and independent
learners’ writing. Procedia: Social and Behavioral Sciences 98 (May 2014), 
1390–1399. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.03.557

[78]   Jeni Paay, Jesper Kjeldskov, Anders Christensen, Andreas Ibsen, Dan 
Jensen, Glen Nielsen, et al. 2008. Location-based storytelling in
the urban environment. In Proceedings of the 20th Australasian Conference on 
Computer-Human Interaction Designing for Habitus and
Habitat (OZCHI’08). ACM, New York, NY, 122–129. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1517744.1517786

[79]   Allan Paivio. 1990. Mental Representations: A Dual Coding Approach. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

[80]   Ruth A. Palmquist and Kyung-Sun Kim. 2000. Cognitive style and on-line 
database search experience as predictors of web search
performance. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and 
Technology 51, 6 (Mar. 2000), 558–566. DOI:https://doi.org/
10.1002/(SICI)1097-4571(2000)51:6 558::AID-ASI7 3.0.CO;2-9

[81]   Konstantinos Papangelis, Melvin Metzger, Yiyang Sheng, Hai-Ning Liang, 
Alan Chamberlain, and Vassilis-Javed Khan. 2017. “Get off
my lawn!”: Starting to understand territoriality in location based mobile 
games. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA’17). ACM, New York, NY, 
1955–1961. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3027063.
3053154


[82]   Isabel Pedersen, Nathan Gale, Pejman Mirza-Babaei, and Samantha Reid. 
2017. More than meets the eye: The benefits of augmented
reality and holographic displays for digital cultural heritage. ACM Journal on 
Computing and Cultural Heritage 10, 2 (Mar. 2017), 1–15.

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3051480

[83]   Sara Elizabeth Perry, Maria Roussou, Maria Economou, Hilary Young, and 
Laia Pujol. 2017. Moving beyond the virtual museum:
Engaging visitors emotionally. In Proceedings of the 2017 23rd International 
Conference on Virtual System Multimedia (VSMM’17). IEEE,

Los Alamitos, CA, 1–8. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/VSMM.2017.8346276

[84]   Daniela Petrelli and Sinead O’Brien. 2018. Phone vs. Tangible in 
museums: A comparative study. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’18). ACM, New York, NY, 
Article 112, 12 pages. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/
3173574.3173686

[85]   Panagiotis Petridis, Ian Dunwell, Fotis Liarokapis, George Constantinou, 
Sylvester Arnab, Sara de Freitas, et al. 2013. The Herbert
Virtual Museum. Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering 2013 (2013), 
1–8. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/487970

[86]   Robert T. Pithers. 2002. Cognitive learning style: A review of the field 
dependent-field independent approach. Journal of Vocational
Education and Training 54, 1 (Mar. 2002), 117–132. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/13636820200200191

[87]   Christina Pollalis, Whitney Fahnbulleh, Jordan Tynes, and Orit Shaer. 
2017. HoloMuse: Enhancing engagement with archaeological
artifacts through gesture-based interaction with holograms. In Proceedings of 
the 10th International Conference on Tangible, Embedded,
and Embodied Interaction (TEI’17). ACM, New York, NY, 565–570. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3024969.3025094

[88]   Laia Pujol-Tost. 2018. Cultural presence in virtual archaeology: An 
exploratory analysis of factors. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments 26, 3 (2018), 247–263. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1162/pres_a_00296

[89]   George E. Raptis, Christos A. Fidas, and Nikolaos M. Avouris. 2016. 
Differences of field dependent/independent gamers on cultural
heritage playing: Preliminary findings of an eye–tracking study. In Digital 
Heritage. Progress in Cultural Heritage: Documentation,
Preservation, and Protection, M. Ioannides, E. Fink, A. Moropoulou, M. 
Hagedorn-Saupe, A. Fresa, G. Liestøl, et al. (Eds.). Springer
International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 199–206. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-48974-2_22

[90]   George E. Raptis, Christos A. Fidas, and Nikolaos M. Avouris. 2016. Do 
field dependence-independence differences of game players
affect performance and behaviour in cultural heritage games? In Proceedings of 
the 2016 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human
Interaction in Play (CHI PLAY’16). ACM, New York, NY, 38–43. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2967934.2968107

[91]   George E. Raptis, Christos A. Fidas, and Nikolaos M. Avouris. 2016. 
Using eye tracking to identify cognitive differences: A brief
literature review. In Proceedings of the 20th Pan-Hellenic Conference on 
Informatics (PCI’16). ACM, New York, NY, Article 21, 6 pages.

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3003733.3003762

[92]   George E. Raptis, Christos A. Fidas, and Nikolaos M. Avouris. 2017. 
Cultural heritage gaming: Effects of human cognitive styles
on players’ performance and visual behavior. In the Adjunct Publication of the 
25th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and
Personalization (UMAP’17). ACM, New York, NY, 343–346. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3099023.3099090

[93]   George E. Raptis, Christos A. Fidas, and Nikolaos M. Avouris. 2017. On 
implicit elicitation of cognitive strategies using gaze transition
entropies in pattern recognition tasks. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA’17). ACM, New York, NY, 1993–2000. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3053106

[94]   George E. Raptis, Christos A. Fidas, and Nikolaos M. Avouris. 2018. 
Effects of mixed-reality on players’ behaviour and immersion in a
cultural tourism game: A cognitive processing perspective. International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 114 (June 2018), 69–79.

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2018.02.003

[95]   George E. Raptis, Christos A. Fidas, Christina Katsini, and Nikolaos M. 
Avouris. 2018. Towards a cognition-centered personalization
framework for cultural-heritage content. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI EA’18). ACM, New York, NY, Article LBW011, 6 pages. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3190613

[96]   George E. Raptis, Christina Katsini, Marios Belk, Christos A. Fidas, 
George Samaras, and Nikolaos Avouris. 2017. Using eye gaze data
and visual activities to infer human cognitive styles: Method and feasibility 
studies. In Proceedings of the 25th Conference on User
Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization (UMAP’17). ACM, New York, NY, 
164–173. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3079628.3079690

[97]   George E. Raptis, Christina Katsini, Christos A. Fidas, and Nikolaos 
Avouris. 2018. Visualization of cultural-heritage content based
on individual cognitive differences. In Proceedings of the 2018 AVI-CH Workshop 
on Advanced Visual Interfaces for Cultural Heritage
(AVI-CH’18). http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2091/paper9.pdf.

[98]   Keith Rayner. 1977. Visual attention in reading: Eye movements reflect 
cognitive processes. Memory and Cognition 5, 4 (July 1977),
443–448. DOI:https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03197383

[99]   Richard Riding and Indra Cheema. 1991. Cognitive styles—An overview and 
integration. Educational Psychology 11, 3–4 (1991), 193–
215. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/0144341910110301

[100]   Kent A. Rittschof. 2010. Field dependence-independence as visuospatial 
and executive functioning in working memory: Implica-
tions for instructional systems design and research. Educational Technology 
Research and Development 58, 1 (Feb. 2010), 99–114. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-008-9093-6

[101]   Richard J. Robertson and Patricia Alfano. 1985. Field dependence as a 
limiting factor in solving a complex learning problem. Perceptual
and Motor Skills 61, 1 (Aug. 1985), 276–278. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/003151258506100101


[102]   Cesare Rocchi, Oliviero Stock, Massimo Zancanaro, Michael Kruppa, and 
Antonio Krüger. 2004. The museum visit: Generating seam-
less personalized presentations on multiple devices. In Proceedings of the 9th 
International Conference on Intelligent User Interface
(IUI’04). ACM, New York, NY, 316–318. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/964442.964517

[103]   Irene Rubino, Claudia Barberis, Jetmir Xhembulla, and Giovanni Malnati. 
2015. Integrating a location-based mobile game in the
museum visit: Evaluating visitors’ behaviour and learning. ACM Journal on 
Computing and Cultural Heritage 8, 3 (May 2015), Article
15, 18 pages. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2724723

[104]   Kaapo Seppälä, Olli I. Heimo, Timo Korkalainen, Juho Pääkylä, Jussi 
Latvala, Seppo Helle, et al. 2016. Examining user experience
in an augmented reality adventure game: Case Luostarinmäki Handicrafts Museum. 
In Technology and Intimacy: Choice or Coercion,

D. Kreps, G. Fletcher, and M. Griffiths (Eds.). Springer International 
Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 257–276. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-44805-3_21

[105]   Kennon M. Sheldon and Vincent Filak. 2010. Manipulating autonomy, 
competence, and relatedness support in a game-learning context:
New evidence that all three needs matter. British Journal of Social Psychology 
47, 2 (Dec. 2010), 267–283. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1348/
014466607X238797

[106]   Licheng Shi, Yuling Hu, and Jiali Wang. 2016. Effects of cognitive 
styles on eye fixations: Evidence from drivers’ eye movements.

International Journal of Psychology 51, S1 (July 2016), 1153.

[107]   Vandana Singh. 2017. Exploring the relationship between cognitive style 
and learning style with academic achievement of elementary
school learners. Educational Quest 8 (Aug. 2017), 413–419. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.5958/2230-7311.2017.00084.8

[108]   Christos Sintoris, Adrian Stoica, Ioanna Papadimitriou, Nikoleta 
Yiannoutsou, Vassilis Komis, and Nikolaos Avouris. 2010. Museum-
Scrabble: Design of a mobile game for children’s interaction with a digitally 
augmented cultural space. International Journal of Mobile
Human Computer Interaction 2, 2 (2010), 53–71. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.4018/jmhci.2010040104

[109]   Maria Solé Puig, Laura Puigcerver, J. Antonio Aznar-Casanova, and Hans 
Supèr. 2013. Difference in visual processing assessed by eye
vergence movements. PLoS One 8, 9 (Sep. 2013), 372041. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0072041

[110]   Oliviero Stock, Massimo Zancanaro, Paolo Busetta, Charles Callaway, 
Antonio Krüger, Michael Kruppa, et al. 2007. Adaptive, intel-
ligent presentation of information for the museum visitor in PEACH. User 
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 17, 3 (July 2007),
257–304. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-007-9029-6

[111]   Yasuyuki Sumi and Kenji Mase. 2002. Supporting the awareness of shared 
interests and experiences in communities. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 56, 1 (Jan. 2002), 127–146. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.2001.0518

[112]   Han-Yu Sung and Gwo-Jen Hwang. 2013. A collaborative game-based 
learning approach to improving students’ learning performance
in science courses. Computers and Education 63 (Apr. 2013), 43–51. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2012.11.019

[113]   Rhoada K. Tannenbaum. 1982. An Investigation of the Relationship(s) 
Between Selected Instructional Techniques and Identified Field
Dependent and Field Independent Cognitive Styles as Evidenced Among High School 
Students Enrolled in Studies of Nutrition. Ph.D.
Dissertation. St. John’s University, Queens, NY.

[114]   Gary F. Templeton. 2011. A two-step approach for transforming 
continuous variables to normal: Implications and recommendations
for is research. Communications of the Association for Information Systems 28, 
1 (2011), 41–58.

[115]   Marinos  Theodorakopoulos,  Nikos  Papageorgopoulos,  Andriana  Mourti, 
 Angeliki  Antoniou,  Manolis  Wallace,  George  Lepouras,
et al. 2017. Personalized augmented reality experiences in museums using Google 
Cardboards. In Proceeding of the 12th Interna-
tional  Workshop  on  Semantic  and  Social  Media  Adaptation  and  
Personalization  (SMAP’17). IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA, 95–100. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1109/SMAP.2017.8022676

[116]   Anastasios Theodoropoulos, Angeliki Antoniou, and George Lepouras. 
2016. How do different cognitive styles affect learning pro-
gramming? Insights from a game-based approach in Greek schools. ACM 
Transactions on Computing Education 17, 1 (Jan. 2016), Article
3,             25 pages. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2940330

[117]   Tobii AB. 2017. Tobii Pro Glasses 2: User Manual. Tobii AB.

[118]   Dereck Toker, Cristina Conati, Ben Steichen, and Giuseppe Carenini. 
2013. Individual user characteristics and information visual-
ization: Connecting the dots through eye tracking. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI’13). ACM, New York, NY, 295–304. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470696

[119]   Tomas Trescak and Anton Bogdanovych. 2017. Case-based planning for 
large virtual agent societies. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM
Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology (VRST’17). ACM, New York, 
NY, Article 33, 10 pages. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
1145/3139131.3139155

[120]   Evangelos Triantafillou, Andreas Pomportsis, and Stavros Demetriadis. 
2003. The design and the formative evaluation of an adap-
tive educational system based on cognitive styles. Computers and Education 41, 
1 (Aug. 2003), 87–103. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0360-1315(03)00031-9

[121]   Sheila Vaidya and Norman M. Chansky. 1980. Cognitive development and 
cognitive style as factors in mathematics achievement.

Journal of Educational Psychology 72, 3 (1980), 326–330. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.72.3.326

[122]   William R. Watson, Christopher J. Mong, and Constance A. Harris. 2011. 
A case study of the in-class use of a video game for teaching
high school history. Computers and Education 56, 2 (Feb. 2011), 466–474. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2010.09.007


[123]   Michel Wedel and Rik Pieters. 2000. Eye fixations on advertisements and 
memory for brands: A model and findings. Marketing Science

19, 4 (Nov. 2000), 297–312. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.19.4.297.11794

[124]   Wen Wen, Toru Ishikawa, and Takao Sato. 2010. Working memory in spatial 
knowledge acquisition: Differences in encoding processes
and sense of direction. Applied Cognitive Psychology 25, 4 (Aug. 2010), 
654–662. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.1737

[125]   James L. C. Wijnen and Cees J. Groot. 1984. An eye movement analysis 
system (EMAS) for the identification of cognitive pro-
cesses on figural tasks. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers 
16, 3 (May 1984), 277–281. DOI:https://doi.org/10.
3758/BF03202402

[126]   Mathias Wilde and Detlef Urhahne. 2008. Museum learning: A study of 
motivation and learning achievement. Journal of Biological
Education 42, 2 (Mar. 2008), 78–83. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/00219266.2008.9656115

[127]   Herman A. Witkin, Carol Ann Moore, Donald R. Goodenough, and Patricia 
W. Cox. 1977. Field-dependent and field-independent
cognitive styles and their educational implications. Review of Educational 
Research 47, 1 (Mar. 1977), 1–64.

[128]   Isil Yildirm and Rengin Zengel. 2014. The impact of cognitive styles on 
design students’ spatial knowledge from virtual environments.

Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology 13, 3 (July 2014), 210–215.

[129]   Yuji Yoshimura, Stanislav Sobolevsky, Carlo Ratti, Fabien Girardin, 
Juan Pablo Carrascal, Josep Blat, et al. 2014. An analysis of visitors’
behavior in the Louvre Museum: A study using Bluetooth data. Environment and 
Planning B: Planning and Design 41, 6 (Dec. 2014),
1113–1131. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1068/b130047p

[130]   Daniel Yule, Bonnie MacKay, and Derek Reilly. 2015. Operation Citadell: 
Exploring the role of docents in mixed reality. In Proceedings
of the 2015 Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play (CHI 
PLAY’15). ACM, New York, NY, 285–294. DOI:https://
doi.org/10.1145/2793107.2793135

[131]   Robert Zheng. 2010. Effects of situated learning on students’ knowledge 
acquisition: An individual differences perspective. Journal of
Educational Computing Research 43, 4 (Dec. 2010), 467–487. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.2190/EC.43.4.c

[132]   Shi Zhuomin and Zheng Wanyi. 2014. An eye-tracking study on the 
differences between two cognitive styles of individuals in reading
advertising. Journal of Marketing Science 10, 3 (2014), 128–145.

[133]   Barry J. Zimmerman. 2000. Self-efficacy: An essential motive to learn. 
Contemporary Educational Psychology 25, 1 (Jan. 2000), 82–91.

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1006/ceps.1999.1016

Received January 2018; revised November 2018; accepted November 2018

