Eye Tracking for Locomotion Prediction in Redirected Walking

Markus Zank∗

Andreas Kunz†

Innovation Center Virtual Reality - IWF - ETH Zurich

ABSTRACT

Model predictive control was shown to be a powerful tool for Redi-
rected Walking when used to plan and select future redirection tech-
niques. However, to use it effectively, a good prediction of the
user’s future actions is crucial. Traditionally, this prediction is made
based on the user’s position or current direction of movement. In
the area of cognitive sciences however, it was shown that a person’s
gaze can also be highly indicative of his intention in both selection
and navigation tasks.

In this paper, this effect is used the ﬁrst time to predict a user’s
locomotion target during goal-directed locomotion in an immersive
virtual environment. After discussing the general implications and
challenges of using eye tracking for prediction in a locomotion con-
text, we propose a prediction method for a user’s intended locomo-
tion target. This approach is then compared with position based
approaches in terms of prediction time and accuracy based on data
gathered in an experiment.

The results show that, in certain situations, eye tracking allows
an earlier prediction compared approaches currently used for redi-
rected walking. However, other recently published prediction meth-
ods that are based on the user’s position perform almost as well as
the eye tracking based approaches presented in this paper.

Keywords: Tracking, locomotion, eye tracking, prediction, redi-
rected walking, virtual reality.

Index Terms: H.5.1 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
Multimedia Information Systems—Artiﬁcial, augmented, and vir-
I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional
tual realities;
Graphics and Realism—Virtual reality

1 INTRODUCTION

Walking is our natural way of navigating in our surroundings and
for this reason it is also the most natural and intuitive means of nav-
igation in virtual environments. It was shown in a number of studies
that users perform better in a variety of tasks the closer the interac-
tion is to the real-world counterpart. In the context of navigation,
this means that any interaction using keyboard and mouse is out-
performed by navigation methods that allow the user to naturally
turn his head to look around. The performance increases further if
the user can also physically walk in the virtual environment. This
typically requires a large scale tracking space that meets the high la-
tency and precision requirements necessary to avoid cyber-sickness.
Howver, the size of the virtual environment will still be limited to
the size of this tracking space.

To overcome this limitation, Razzaque et al. introduced the con-
cept of redirected walking [20]. By scaling the user’s physical turns
in the virtual environment, he can be tricked into turning 180◦ in the
physical world while only turning 90◦ in the virtual world. In this
way, a larger virtual space can be compressed into a limited tracking
space.

∗e-mail: zank@iwf.mavt.ethz.ch
†e-mail: kunz@iwf.mavt.ethz.ch

IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces 2016
19–20 March, Greenville, SC, USA
978-1-5090-0842-1/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

In the following years, a number of additional techniques for
redirection were introduced: curvature gains, which add additional
curvature [23], velocity gains, which scale the user’s speed in move-
ment direction [7, 27] and resets or reorientations, that force the
user to execute speciﬁc actions [19, 28]. Usually only one of
these techniques was applied, sometimes in combination with an
immersion-breaking reset in case the user was about to leave the
tracking space. However, to guarantee maximal immersion, all
techniques should be used to their fullest potential and exactly in
the situations where they are optimal.

To this end, Zmuda et al. [31] introduced the idea of using prob-
abilistic planning to redirected walking. Nescher et al. [14] con-
tinued in this direction and formulated the selection of the optimal
technique to be applied as a model predictive control problem. This
allows applying the minimal amount of redirection required to pre-
vent the user from leaving the tracking space. However, in most
cases it is not known in advance what a user will do or where he will
go and therefore it is unclear which redirection technique would be
best in the long run. In order to solve this problem, a prediction of
the user’s future path is required.

1.1 Prediction for Redirected Walking

In the past, prediction for redirected walking was done by estimat-
ing a single future path which was then transformed to keep the
user inside the tracking space [5, 16, 22, 24]. These predictions
were made based on the user’s current viewing direction, direction
of movement, past movement or a combination thereof. The result-
ing prediction is a single straight line path with the exception of Su
et al. [24] who ﬁtted a curved path based on the user’s past path.
However, a model predictive control planner for redirected walking
can consider multiple branching paths in its planning process, and
to take full advantage of its potential we require a prediction that
provides multiple future paths together with their respective proba-
bility.

As Nitzsche et al. [16] already discussed, there are predictions
on different time scales and with different knowledge of the envi-
ronment and models of human behavior. All methods presented and
discussed in this paper work on a medium timescale. This timescale
is longer than the immediate next step and therefore the predictors
are not meant to predict or detect sudden changes in direction such
as stopping and turning 90◦ (however, they should be able to re-
cover and change the prediction immediately after such an event).
On the other hand, the prediction will be limited to areas that are
currently visible to the user and there are no cognitive or behav-
ioral models included in the prediction. In addition, all methods re-
quire discrete target positions the user is expected to walk to. These
can either be points of interest or landmarks in the environment or
points that are important in the environment’s layout such as choke
points or junctions.

All predictors used in this paper are formulated to include
Bayesian priors and while they need to be determined experimen-
tally for every new environment and can potentially improve the
prediction performance, they are not required and can be replaced
by a uniform distribution. In this paper, we will use data gathered
in one condition of the user experiment to determine the priors and
then evaluate the performance of the predictors on data from an-
other condition.

49

2 RELATED WORK

The prediction of a person’s future movements has a wide range
of applications and research on this topic has produced a number of
different approaches. While prediction of human actions has gained
increased importance in the robotics community (e.g., [9, 29]), the
requirements and restrictions differ from the ones suitable for an ap-
plication in virtual reality. In a collision avoidance application, the
robot itself carries most of the sensors and has to deal with multiple
humans moving around it. Therefore, most methods for prediction
have an exocentric perspective on the human and often use camera-
based approaches. However, in an immersive virtual environment
there is only one person and at least the head position is already
tracked in order to control the point of view in the virtual environ-
ment which makes this an egocentric problem not usually found in
other areas. For this reason, we focus on prediction approaches that
already use the egocentric formulation.

Both Zmuda et al. [31] and Nescher et al. [14] used graph repre-
sentations of their respective virtual environments. This graph rep-
resentations are predeﬁned and consist of nodes and edges connect-
ing two nodes. On this graph, they used a probabilistic approach
to predict the user’s future path. For prediction, the edge closest
to the user’s current position is found and predeﬁned probabilities
for the edges connected to the next node are used. However, this
does not include any data on how the user actually behaves in the
environment over time. In order to use this additional information,
a number of prediction approaches based on the user’s movement
were developed. Su et al. proposed a prediction for telepresence
motion-compression by using linear regression of the user’s past
path to extrapolate his movements into the future [24]. Nescher et
al. used a double exponential smoother instead of the regression
to smooth the gait-induced head movements and to estimate the in-
tended movement direction [15].

Zank et al. extended this concept for the case in which pre-
deﬁned locomotion targets are available in the environment [30].
By using standard models of human locomotion [1, 2], it is pos-
sible to obtain an expected reference path to each of the targets.
Once the user starts moving, the observed movement can be com-
pared to the simulated reference trajectories and a prediction can
be made. For this, they use standard methods like Dynamic Time
Warping and also proposed a new cost-based comparison method
that evaluates the amount of “wasted” movement towards each of
the potential target points.

However, all these approaches are based on the user’s path or
location which means that if the paths to two possible targets are
identical at this point, there is no way of telling which of the two
targets is the correct one. Examples for such situations could be a
T-maze, where a long corridor splits up into two opposite paths, or
a situation where a person has not yet begun to walk.

However, predicting a person’s action is interesting not only in
the context of locomotion in virtual reality. It was shown in con-
sumer and cognitive science research that a person’s gaze can be
highly predictive of future actions in selection tasks. Various re-
searchers found that if people are asked to make a decision between
a number of options, there is a signiﬁcant gaze bias towards the cho-
sen option for a short time period before the decision is announced
[3, 17, 25, 26]. It is also known that the gaze direction leads the
walking direction by a few seconds [6] and the same holds true for
driving [8, 12]. For a comprehensive summary of eye tracking in
various tasks including reading, walking and sandwich-making, see
Land et al. [11]. In addition, this leading behavior occurs not only
for the eyes. It has also been observed that the head direction usu-
ally leads the torso and body orientation when walking on a curved
path [4].

This prior research leads to the conclusion that a person’s gaze
could offer beneﬁts over traditional position based approaches
when predicting a person’s locomotion target. In the following sec-

tions, we will discuss the challenges and risks of eye tracking as a
prediction method. Then we present a prediction approach using
eye tracking and assess its performance in a user experiment.

3 EYE TRACKING

It was shown in the past, that our gaze leads future movements when
walking or driving. In this context, it seems obvious to use it as a
means of predicting future actions. However, other research has
shown that gaze is also directed to regions that contain information
relevant to the current task [18, 21, 25] which is in line with obser-
vations made in the driving context. We assume that since driving
is usually the primary task, gaze is mostly controlled by the require-
ments of steering and therefore a lot of time is spent looking at the
intended driving target, especially in the often artiﬁcial experimen-
tal context this data was gathered in. However, for data gathered
on the road, the gaze will already be distributed between steering
along the road, watching other trafﬁc participants, and the scenery
[10].

But in the context of real walking in virtual environments, walk-
ing around might not even be the primary task. Consider for exam-
ple a virtual art gallery, it is very likely that a person’s gaze will be
directed towards the paintings, since this is usually the primary rea-
son for being in an art gallery. However, it is reasonable to assume
that the visitor will not walk to each of them. But he will still look
at most of them, at least to determine if it is worth to walk there.
A similar situation occurs for a search task, there will be a lot of
scanning the environment and a decision for a new locomotion tar-
get will only be made if there is new information visible. In these
situations, it is possible that eye tracking alone cannot provide suf-
ﬁcient data for a stable prediction, but it might be able to support
an unsure decision based on a position based prediction.

At this point, we have to make a distinction between locomo-
tion and wayﬁnding. Following the deﬁnitions by Montello [13],
locomotion is the physical movement of the body through the en-
vironment, whereas wayﬁnding is the cognitive task of planning a
future movement. Together, they are involved in navigation which
he deﬁnes as “goal-directed movement through the environment”.
In the cases described above, it becomes difﬁcult to distinguish eye
movements used for wayﬁnding from those used without locomo-
tion intention. However, we hypothesize that there is a point where
we need our vision for locomotion in order to make a certain turn or
avoid obstacles, similar to the behavior observed for driving a car.
At this point, eye tracking should be able to provide evidence for a
prediction, but it is unclear how much time can be gained compared
to traditional approaches.

4 METHODS

The prediction method presented in the following section assumes
that there is a set of target points representing a person’s possible
future targets. Automatically detecting these points from the envi-
ronments is beyond the scope of this paper and it is assumed that
the location of these points is known.

The goal is to estimate the probability P(τ), which is the prob-
ability of τ being the intended locomotion target, for each target
τ ∈ T given the user’s current behavior. T is the set of all avail-
able targets and in this paper we assume that it contains all possible
targets (meaning there are no targets we don’t know about). In the
following, we present a method to use eye tracking data to achieve
this goal and compare it with prediction approaches based on the
user’s position.

It can be assumed that there is a gaze bias towards a person’s
intended locomotion target τ. Additionally, it can be assumed that
there is a relation between the user’s location in the environment R
and the point in the environment he is looking at G given a certain
target. For this reason, we propose to use a probability distribution
for G that is conditional on the user’s location and his locomotion

50

target. Equation (1) follows from Bayes’ theorem and describes
the probability of a certain target being the one the user intends to
walk to P(τi|R, G) as a function of P(R, G|τi) which has to be deter-
mined experimentally. However, it might be possible in the future
to automatically generate them based on the virtual environment,
if a bottom-up model based on the environment’s local geometry
and saliency is viable.
If this is not the case, a data driven ap-
proach could be more promising. P(τ), on the other hand, contains
a prior probability and allows bringing in prior knowledge about
the probabilities of all targets. However, these values are highly
environment-, task- and knowledge-dependent which makes them
difﬁcult to determine but they can potentially be a powerful tool for
highly stereotyped or scripted tasks. This could for example be the
case in a training scenario where the correct sequence of tasks is
known and the user is supposed to follow it.

P(τi|R, G) =

P(R, G|τi) · P(τi)
∑∀τ j∈T P(R, G|τ j) · P(τ j)

(1)

Please note that even though P(R, G|τ) is formulated as a multi-
modal probability distribution, it merely serves as a fully complete
example in this section, while the formulations evaluated in this pa-
per will be discussed in Section 6.1. G and R are points in 3D space,
but for a virtual environment that does not allow vertical movement,
it is sufﬁcient to use a 2D position for both. The probability is real-
ized as a discrete probability distribution, where the resolution can
be chosen according to the requirements and the amount of avail-
able data.

A second approach is to look at differences in the temporal dis-
tribution of G. The hypothesis is that there is a signiﬁcant bias
towards the selected target similar to the one observed by Wiener
et al. [25]. From their work and other work on eye tracking dur-
ing decisions, we hypothesize that there are two areas or time in-
tervals in which the bias could occur: First, when the decision is
made, and second when gaze is used for steering. The ﬁrst occur-
rence should be inﬂuenced by prior knowledge of the environment
and task-speciﬁc circumstances, while the second one should de-
pend more on the local geometry (sharp turn, narrow passage, door,
etc.). Since both aspects are directly related to the environment’s
geometry, we will consider the problem more from a spatial rather
than a temporal perspective and will therefore focus on distances
and zones in space rather than time intervals in the evaluation.

5 EXPERIMENT

5.1 General Considerations
In order to gather data to determine P(R, G|τ) and to compare eye
tracking based prediction with position based prediction, a user
study was conducted. Since prior knowledge and task can play a
major role for eye movements, it was decided to conduct a user
experiment without a task that could strongly inﬂuence eye move-
ments. Such a task could be a search task where a user would natu-
rally use their eyes to look for whatever they need to ﬁnd.

To be able to evaluate the eye tracking and path data, it is im-
portant to know the user’s intended target. Other work that demon-
strated the potential of eye tracking for prediction often used se-
lection tasks, where the selection can be performed almost instan-
taneously after the user’s decision. However, for walking there is
an inherent delay between the choice of a target and the time when
the target is reached.
It is therefore possible that multiple deci-
sions occurred during the walking process, for example if a person
can’t decide between two targets or changes his mind. In such a
case the prediction should show an alternating prediction. How-
ever, without any additional insight on the participant’s cognitive
process (e.g., through a think-aloud protocol), we would assume
poor prediction performance, even though it was actually correct.
Therefore, it is necessary for the user to know where he wants to

(a) Y-room, left condition. The right condition
is mirrored.

(b) T-maze, all conditions

Figure 1: The main layouts. The user enters from one of the two
elevators on the left (marked with S), approaches the door with the
instruction (red line) and walks to one of the elevators on the right.
The elevators take him to the respective elevator (marked with E)
on the next ﬂoor. All distances are in meters.

Figure 2: Y-room, free choice condition. Due to space restrictions,
the layout for the free choice condition in the Y-room is slightly
different from the left and right conditions. All distances are in
meters.

go to be able to properly determine the predictors performance in
a post-hoc evaluation. For this, it was decided to give the partici-
pants clear instructions on what to do and not let them explore an
unknown environment or make too many decisions on their own.

5.2 Design
In the ﬁnal design, the users were placed in a virtual environment
of a multi-story building and instructed to reach the top ﬂoor by
following arrows located in the environment and using a series of
elevators for vertical movement. Every condition in the experiment
was located on a single ﬂoor, each of which had two exits or eleva-
tors leading to the next ﬂoor. In this way, any number of conditions
and repetitions can be done using the maximum available track-
ing space without redirection or interaction from the experimenter,
while providing enough narrative to the user to behave naturally.

As already discussed by Zmuda et al. [31], we can expect dif-
ferent behavior from people in a narrow maze-like environment in
comparison to wide, open spaces. Prediction is also potentially eas-
ier in the second case because the traveled path will diverge earlier
compared to a narrow maze, since humans generally follow short
and smooths trajectories to their target. For this reason, two main

51

SSE1.461.44.92.90.92.31.4SESE9.261.42.31.4SSEE61.41.44.91.52.30.11.9Figure 3: View in the Y-room “free choice” condition from the start-
ing door towards the exits.

(a) Go left

(b) Free choice

Figure 4: Instruction symbols. They appear as holograms on the
currently closed door.

layout types were included in the study: A room with two exits
side-by-side on the opposite wall (Y-room, Figure 1a) and a cor-
ridor with two exits to the left and right (T-maze, Figure 1b). In
both cases, the layouts have two exits that are located symmetri-
cally with respect to the room’s main axis. To avoid any changes in
visibility while the participant is moving through the environment,
a door was added at the beginning of the ﬂoor. This door is initially
closed and only opens once the user is standing in front of it for two
seconds.

Each layout was paired with one of three instructions: “Go left”,
“go right” or “free choice”. The “go left” and “go right” condi-
tions simulate a participant with knowledge of the environment and
a clear target in mind. This can be either task-related, or because the
participant wants to go to a certain location in the environments. In
the “free choice” condition, the participant does not have a prede-
ﬁned target, this can either represent a search task, an unknown en-
vironment, or a situation where both decisions lead to the intended
target. For space reasons the layout for the “free choice” Y-room
has a smaller distance between the exits (see Figures 2 and 3), the
layout for the T-maze is identical for all conditions. Participants
were instructed of their task on the individual ﬂoors with arrows
that appear as holograms on the closed door at the beginning of the
ﬂoor (see Figure 4). Once the door opened, the icon disappeared.
This allows a comparison with the other two conditions to see how
the gaze-patterns changes from the forced conditions.The left and
right conditions appeared three times each, together with two free
choice conditions for each of the room layouts.

In addition, there were a number of “museum” ﬂoors. Here, the
users were shown sets of three paintings, symbols or numbers and
had to indicate which of them does not ﬁt with the others by stand-
ing in a circle in front of it (see Figure 5 for an example). This task
was included to keep the users engaged and also to distract from the
experiment’s actual purpose. Therefore, the sets were deliberately
designed to be non-trivial with potentially more than one answer
that could be argued for. Such a “museum” ﬂoor was inserted after
every other study ﬂoor. This results in a total of 25 ﬂoors with 16

52

Figure 5: View from the entrance to the three symbols on the 12th
ﬂoor

study layouts, seven “museum” ﬂoors, a start and an end ﬂoor.

Prior to the experiment, the participants had the opportunity to
walk around in a virtual environment of a small apartment in order
to familiarize themselves with the system. Afterwards, they were
instructed about their task for the experiment with a short example.
This example used the same geometries and arrows, but a differ-
ent “museum” ﬂoor. After they ﬁnished the experiment, they were
offered the opportunity to try another virtual environment.

5.3 Setup

The setup (depicted in Figure 6) consists of an Oculus DK2 head-
mounted display1 with an integrated SMI eye tracker2. The track-
ing system is an Intersense IS-1200 attached to the HMD provid-
ing 6 DOF position tracking at 180 Hz. The system is powered
by a backpack-mounted laptop and the virtual environment runs in
Unity3D3. The environment was optimized to run constantly at the
display’s maximum framerate (75 Hz).

The eye tracker was calibrated using a 5 point calibration and
runs at 60 Hz. The gaze vector given by it was intersected with the
geometry in real time and both the original vector and the resulting
3D position were recorded. The data from the position tracker was
recorded at 180 Hz, but was subsampled to match the eye tracker’s
update rate.

Additionally, the users wore headphones and heard music and
sounds from the doors and elevators in the environment in order to
dampen the sounds in the real environment.

6 RESULTS

14 participants were recruited among the student body. The average
age was 25 (± 4.1) years and average height was 177 (± 7) cm.
The data was then cut into individual paths on each ﬂoors, resulting
in 224 study-ﬂoors. The beginning of each path is the ﬁrst eye-
tracking data point that is beyond the initial doors. The path ends
when the participant enters one of the target zones. The data from
the start and end ﬂoors as well as the “museum” ﬂoors was recorded
but not used in this evaluation. 24 ﬂoors were excluded from the
evaluation, because users went to the wrong elevator either because
they forgot the instruction or they were curious to see what is there.

1http://www.oculusvr.com
2http://www.smivision.com/en/

gaze-and-eye-tracking-systems/products/
eye-tracking-hmd-upgrade.html

3http://unity3d.com

(a) T-maze, all conditions

(b) Y-room, left

(c) Y-room, free choice

Figure 7: Target zones (hatched area) and target locations (red and blue circles) for all conditions. The red vertical lines represent the doors
at the beginning of the environment, the blue vertical lines mark the location where the environment opens up to the side (see Figures 12-15).

gaze distribution when the user approaches the decision point. The
probability is deﬁned in equation (3).

P(τi|G, Rx) =

P(G ∈ G j|Ri ≤ Rx < Ri+1, τ) · P(τi)
∑∀τ j∈T P(G ∈ G j|Ri ≤ Rx < Ri+1, τ j) · P(τ j)
for Ri = f · i, Ri ∈ [0, 20]

(3)

The range [0, 20] is chosen to completely cover the layouts used
while the resolution f can be chosen depended on the available
data. The methods proposed so far cannot capture behavior over
time such as a user looking at a single target for a long time. To
account for this, we propose a combination of the single frame pre-
diction deﬁned in equations (2) and (3) over a deﬁned time period
T, where t0 is the time of the prediction. By tuning T it is possible
to trade responsiveness and the maximal conﬁdence. For example
a predictor with a very small T will react quickly if the user looks
somewhere else, but there is also a upper limit for P(τi,t0)T . A
larger T allows P(τi,t0)T to go to 1 if the user looks at a target long
enough, but the predictor is not as responsive.

P(τi,t0)T =

∏

t0−T
t=t0
∑∀τ j∈T ∏

P(τi,t)
t0−T
t=t0

P(τ j,t)

(4)

The next method is based on the gaze bias towards the chosen
target that was expected based on the literature. The user is ex-
pected to look at the intended target for a longer period overall,
but not necessarily in the last time. Instead of using the previous
method with a very large T , we consider the expected distribution
of stays in different target zones. Tspent (i) is the total time the user
was looking at Gi so far. P(T ≥ Tspent (i)|τi) is the probability that a
person would look at Gi for at least Tspent given that i is the intended
target.

P(τi|Tspent ) =

P(T ≥ Tspent (i)|τi) · P(τi)
∑∀τ j∈T P(T ≥ Tspent ( j)|τ j) · P(τ j)

(5)

The main metric for comparing prediction methods is the time
between the time a reliable prediction and the time the predicted ac-
tion (in this case turn left or right) occurs. However, since this time
depends on the user’s walking speed, the predictions are compared
based on the distance between the point where a reliable prediction
can be made and the wall opposite of the door through which the
user entered the room projected on the room’s x-axis. The axes and
origins for the respective layouts are deﬁned in Figure 7.

6.2 Statistical Analysis

In the following section, the observed user behavior is analyzed sta-
tistically. In the “free choice” condition, participants chose the left
path in the T-maze condition in 14 cases, while the right path was

53

Figure 6: Virtual reality simulator setup

6.1 Eye Tracking Realization
For the evaluation of the presented user experiment, three realiza-
tions of the eye tracking concept in Section 3 are used. As men-
tioned before the probability that are conditional on τ are discrete
probability distribution and their resolution is limited by the amount
of available data. For the eye tracking data, we propose a discretiza-
tion that only allows one bin per target plus one additional bin that
is not associated with any target. We will refer to these areas as
target zones G , since they correspond to a physical area around the
target points. While this is a very rough discretization, it is very
easy to determine them automatically for a new environment given
the targets’ locations. Figure 7 deﬁnes the target zones used deﬁned
the layouts used for the experiment.

The ﬁrst version is a purely eye tracking based approach that
does not take the user’s position in space or changes over time into
account. From the gathered data , we calculate P(G ∈ Gi|τi) (see
Table 1) and determine the probability as deﬁned in equation (2).

P(τi|G) =

P(G ∈ G j|τi) · P(τi)
∑∀τ j∈T P(G ∈ G j|τ j) · P(τ j)

(2)

The second method that was considered takes the user’s posi-
tion in the room and the eye tracking position into account. In the
general case, the user’s position in 2D space should be considered.
However, because the layouts used in this study have one main di-
rection of travel, it is acceptable to only consider the user’s position
in this direction (x-axis). This allows capturing the changes in the

XYXYXYIntended Target Other Target Off Target

Condition
T-maze Left
T-maze Right
T-maze Free
Y-maze Left
Y-maze Right
Y-maze Free

0.58
0.50
0.46
0.65
0.67
0.48

0.19
0.23
0.28
0.12
0.11
0.12

0.23
0.27
0.26
0.23
0.22
0.40

Table 1: Relative overall stay time is in a certain target-zone

chosen also chosen 14 times. For the Y-room the left path was cho-
sen 12 times, the right path was chosen 15 times. 4 participants
chose the same option in both T-maze conditions while 7 partici-
pants chose the same option in both Y-room conditions. Since there
is practically no task in this study, it is possible that there is an in-
ﬂuence of the previous ﬂoor’s layout.

Figure 8 and Figure 9 show the duration of the stays in different
target-zones. In this context a “stay” is considered to be the pe-
riod during which the participant looks at one speciﬁc target zone.
There can be multiple ﬁxations within one zone, meaning that mul-
tiple points can be focused on within the same target zone, but it
still counts as one stay. Both the number of stays and the duration
of the individual stay is signiﬁcantly higher for the zone of the in-
tended target (p < 0.01). Table 1 shows the relative stay time in the
zone they eventually entered, in the other zone and in neither of the
zones for the different conditions and layouts. For the “free choice”
conditions this was assigned based on the ﬁnal decision. Even when
people were free to choose, there is a bias towards the target-zone
that was entered at the end.

6.3 Single Sample Evaluation
In the following, the data is analyzed looking at only a single data
point or a pair of data points from position and eye tracker. Figure
11a shows all the sampled user positions in the xy-plane. Figure
11b shows the gaze direction (as deﬁned in equation (6) and Fig-
ure 10) along the users’ paths through the environment. Every line
corresponds the path traveled by a single participant on one ﬂoor.

ϕ = tan−1 (cid:16) Gy − Ry
Rx − Gx

(cid:17)

(6)

In general, both position and gaze direction show a highly stereo-
typical behavior without any fundamental differences in behavior
between people. However, as expected there are some cases when
people look around or scan the alternative corridor before looking
in the intended walking direction causing the outliers in Figure 11b.
For the Y-room condition, the behavior is different as shown in
Figure 12. Due to the wide space available, the users’ paths diverge
around 5 meters in front of the opposite wall which is exactly at the

point the room widens. This aligns nicely with the principle un-
derlying many locomotion models that humans try to keep the path
traveled as smooth as possible. Since ϕ takes the y-position into ac-
count when calculating the angle, the gaze direction differs during
the steering motion around 4-5 meters in front of the opposite wall
and goes back to zero afterwards.

6.4 Position Based Prediction

In order to determine if and to what extent an eye tracking allows
an earlier prediction compared to approaches based purely on the
user’s position, the approach previously presented in this paper is
compared with previously published methods.

The compared approaches are the one used by Nescher et al. [14]
for redirected walking, the two cost-based approaches and one ap-
proach using Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) by Zank et al. [30].
The approach by Nescher et al. uses a graph representation of the
environment consisting of straight line segments and arc segments
with 0.8m radius. The prediction is done by ﬁnding the graph seg-
ment closest to the current position and following the graph along
the direction of movement. When a node is reached, predeﬁned
probabilities are used for all possibilities.

The three predictors by Zank et al. are centered around the
idea that human locomotion trajectories are optimal to some de-
gree, meaning that humans usually walk on smooth and short paths
to their target. They propose to use a model of human locomotion
to generate a set of reference trajectories to all possible targets the
moment the user starts to walk and then compare the observed tra-
jectory to them while the user walks. In the following evaluation
the models by Arechavaleta et al. [1] and Fink et al. [2] are used
to generate these reference trajectories. In addition, they presented
different schemes for comparing the observed path to the reference
trajectories, the most promising ones are based on Dynamic Time
Warping (DTW) and the cost-based method. Here, they use a cost
function to calculate the amount of movement that was “wasted”
if the user wanted to reach a speciﬁc target. Based on the differ-
ence in “wasted” movement towards different targets, they calcu-
late a probability distribution. The combination of the path model
by Arechavaleta et al. with the cost-based predictor (“Arechavaleta,
cost”) as well as the model by Fink et al. with both the cost-based
( “Fink, cost”) and the Dynamic Time Warping ( “Fink, DTW”)
predictors are included in the evaluation.

The approaches by Nescher et al. and Zank et al. need distinct
points in the environment as target points, they are manually deﬁned
as depicted in Figure 7. The predictors by Zank et al. use the ﬁrst
position sample on the path as a starting point, the approach by
Nescher et al. uses an additional node in the middle of the door.
For the following evaluation, both targets were considered by the
predictors. Even for the “go left” and “go right” condition, the
predictors were not aware that the user had no choice. Otherwise,

(a) Left

(b) Right

(a) Left

(b) Right

Figure 8: Distribution of the stay time between the left target-zone
(red) and the right target-zone (blue) for the conditions T-maze go
left (a), and T-maze go right (b)

Figure 9: Distribution of the stay time between the left target-zone
(red) and the right target-zone (blue) for the conditions Y-maze go
left (a), and Y-maze go right (b)

54

More than 50% classiﬁed at [m] (x-axis)
Avg. # correct
# class
Max. # correct
# class
Mean overall performance
Std dev. overall performance

T / Y Arech., cost
6.3
9.6
0.75
0.48
0.93
0.64
0.73
0.48
0.24
0.36

Fink, cost
6.6
9.4
0.76
0.59
0.94
0.99
0.78
0.59
0.20
0.17

Fink, DTW Nescher Graph

-
1.00
1.00
0.50
0.01

3.9
0.92
1.00
0.71
0.09

1.1
0.99
1.00
0.51
0.00

4.9
0.88
1.00
0.81
0.08

P(τ|G)0.25
6.5
8.2
0.78
0.69
0.97
0.86
0.78
0.62
0.22
0.22

P(τ|Tspent )
4.1
3.2
0.79
0.77
1.00
0.88
0.70
0.58
0.14
0.10

Table 2: Characteristic performance for predictors for the forced T-maze condition in the ﬁrst column under each method and the forced
Y-room condition in the second column. The two best performing and earliest predictors are highlighted for each layout.

6.5 Comparison

The eye tracking based predictors were evaluated in a leave-one-
out cross-validation scheme. The prediction for each user was done
based on the conditional probabilities calculated with the data from
the remaining participants. The combination of measurements over
a certain time period as deﬁned in equation (4) was evaluated for
T = (0, 1). There is an increase performance for larger T , but the
increase levels off for T > 0.25 and since this also increases latency,
T = 0.25 was chosen for the following evaluation.

Both the P(τ|G, Rx)0.25 and P(τ|G)0.25 predictors (equations (2)
and (3)) were evaluated, but the difference in performance was
small and not signiﬁcant (p = 0.72). As a result, only P(τ|G)0.25
will be included in detail in the following evaluation.

To compare the different prediction methods, we assume that
a prediction is considered reliable when the maximum probability
reaches 66%. Then we look at the user’s position along the x-axis
when a reliable prediction is made. Figures 13 and 14 show the ra-
tio of correct, incorrect and undecided samples for the the T-maze
and Y-room conditions against the user’s current position along the
x-axis. This visualizes how the prediction develops as the users
progress through the respective environments.

Table 2 summarizes the predictors’ characteristic performance
ﬁgures, namely the largest distance from the opposite wall at which
more than 50% of all users’ paths were classiﬁed (correctly or in-

Figure 10: Projection of the gaze vector on the ground plane. ϕ is
the angle between the gaze direction and the room’s main axis.

all predictors used in the evaluation would give a probability of 1
for the correct target.

(a) 2D position of the participant

(a) 2D position of the participant

(b) Gaze direction and x-position of all participants according to the
deﬁnition in Figure 10

(b) Gaze direction and x-position of all participants according to the
deﬁnition in Figure 10

Figure 11: Position and gaze angle for the “go left” (red) and “go
right” (blue) conditions for the T-maze layout.

Figure 12: Position and gaze angle for the “go left” (red) and “go
right” (blue) conditions for the Y-room layout.

55

Xϕ YGRFigure 13: Distribution of prediction performance along the x-axis
for the selected predictors for the T-maze layout. The plots show
the ratio of correct (white), incorrect (black) and undecided (gray)
data points along the room’s x-axis as well as the location of the
initial door (red vertical line) and the opening into a wider space
(blue vertical line).

Figure 14: Distribution of prediction performance along the x-axis
for the selected predictors for the Y-room layout. The plots show
the ratio of correct (white), incorrect (black) and undecided (gray)
data points along the room’s x-axis as well as the location of the
initial door (red vertical line) and the opening into a wider space
(blue vertical line).

correctly) and the maximum and average ratio between the number
correctly classiﬁed samples to the overall number of classiﬁed sam-
ples. The performance of a single path is deﬁned to be the average
of the probability of the correct target equation (7) where L is the
overall length of the path. The predictor’s overall performance is
the average performance of all recorded paths for the “go left” and
“go right” conditions of one layout.

E =

P(τcorrect )dx

1
L

(cid:90) L

0

(7)

For the following evaluation, the performance of all individual
paths is compared using ANOVA. Results are considered to be sig-
niﬁcant if p < 0.05. Since the predictors were tested in a pair-
wise fashion and the results were Bonferroni-corrected for multi-
ple comparisons. Overall, P(τ|G)0.25 has the highest performance
and is signiﬁcantly better than the predictors “Arechevaleta, cost”
(p < 0.01), “Fink, DTW” (p < 0.01) and P(τ|Tspent ) (p = 0.037).
The “Fink, cost” predictor is also signiﬁcantly better than “Fink,
DTW” (p < 0.01), while “Nescher Graph” is not signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent from any other predictor.

For the T-maze condition, P(τ|G)0.25 also signiﬁcantly better
than “Arechevaleta, cost” (p = 0.049), “Fink, DTW” (p < 0.01),
“Nescher Graph” (p < 0.01) and P(τ|Tspent ) (p < 0.01). The “Fink,
cost” and the P(τ|Tspent ) predictor are also signiﬁcantly better than
“Fink, DTW” and “Nescher Graph” (p < 0.01 for all combina-
tions).

For the Y-room condition, P(τ|G)0.25 is signiﬁcantly better than
“Fink, cost” (p = 0.034) and the P(τ|Tspent ) (p = 0.027). The

“Nescher Graph” predictor is also better than both of them (p <
0.01).

To compare which predictor offers an early prediction, we look
at the point where a decision has been made for at least 50% of all
users. This corresponds to a position along the environments x-axis
and is stated in Table 2. The “Fink, DTW” predictor is excluded
for the T-maze, because it never gives a prediction for the majority
of users.
It can be seen that “Arechavaleta, cost” is the earliest
predictor for the T-maze condition, “Fink, cost” is only 0.2 meters
later. The best eye tracking based predictor is P(τ|G)0.25 which is
1.4 meters behind. For the Y-room condition, “Fink, cost” offers
the earliest prediction, followed by P(τ|G)0.25 and “Arechavaleta,
Cost”. The remaining predictors are signiﬁcantly later.

The initial hypothesis was that there should be two zones where
eye tracking should work best. First, when the environment is ini-
tially seen and the user orients himself and a second time when gaze
is used for steering. The vertical red lines in Figures 13 and 14 show
the location of the door whereas the point at which the room opens
up to the side is marked with a blue line (also see Figure 7).

For P(τ|G)0.25, the advantages of the eye tracking prediction can
be seen. For both conditions, there is a number of path that can
be predicted correctly even before the participant has passed the
initial door (red vertical line). The cost-based predictors show a
similar behavior. The predictor using the closest point on the graph
(Nescher Graph) and the “Fink, DTW” predictor are not able to give
a prediction that early.

For the Y-room conditions on the other hand, the “Fink, DTW”
predictor and graph based approach both perform well with a very
small number of wrong predictions, but they are both later than the

56

T maze
0.46 (-0.01)
Arech., cost
0.55 (-0.04)
Fink, Cost
Fink, DTW 0.50 (-0.00)
0.51 (-0.00)
0.52 (-0.10)
0.55 (-0.02)

Nescher Graph
P(τ|G)0.25
P(τ|Tspent )

Y room
0.66 (-0.07)
0.71 (-0.07)
0.61 (-0.11)
0.69 (-0.12)
0.74 (-0.06)
0.67 (-0.03)

overall
0.56 (-0.04)
0.63 (-0.05)
0.55 (-0.05)
0.60 (-0.06)
0.63 (-0.08)
0.61 (-0.03)

Table 3: Performance of the predictors for the “free choice” con-
ditions. In parentheses is the difference to the “forced” condition.
Signiﬁcant changes are highlighted.

Arech., cost
Fink, Cost
Fink, DTW
Nescher Graph
P(τ|G)0.25
P(τ|Tspent )

T maze
9.54 (-0.02)
9.01 (-0.36)
- (-)
1.05 (-0.05)
4.93 (-3.24)
3.28 (0.05)

Y room
5.16 (-1.18)
6.55 (-0.02)
3.29 (-0.60)
4.06 (-0.83)
6.59 (0.10)
6.55 (2.42)

Table 4: Difference for more than 50% classiﬁed [m]. In parenthe-
ses is the difference to the “forced” condition. Notable changes are
highlighted.

cost-based and the P(τ|G)0.25 predictor. For the T-maze condition,
they are only capable of providing a good prediction after the par-
ticipant has walked into the side corridors (marked by the vertical
blue line). This is a serious limitation, on the other hand they have
the smallest number of wrong classiﬁcations for both conditions
which could be very useful when combining multiple predictors.

6.6 Free Choice Conditions
In the following section, the prediction is evaluated for the “free
choice” condition. The Bayesian priors are determined based on
the position and eye tracking data from the “go left” and “go right”
conditions and resulting probability distributions.

As in the previous section, the conditions are compared based on
their performance as deﬁned in equation (7). For every predictor,
the performance for the free “free choice” condition is compared
with the performance of the same predictor for the forced condition.
Table 3 summarizes the performance of the predictors and shows
the difference when compared to the “forced” condition.

While the two cost-based predictors show no signiﬁcant differ-
ence between the free and forced conditions, the DTW and graph-
based predictor shows a difference for the Y-room condition (both
p < 0.01). From the eye tracking predictors only P(τ|G)0.25 shows
a signiﬁcantly worse performance in the T-maze condition (p =
0.03), which is mainly caused by a worse performance in the be-
ginning. There is no difference for the Y-room and the P(τ|Tspent )
predictor. Looking at the change in prediction distance shown in ta-
ble 4, there is little change with two exceptions. P(τ|G)0.25 is 3.24
meters later than in the “forced” condition whereas P(τ|Tspent ) is
2.42 meters earlier than in the “forced” condition

7 DISCUSSION
In general, eye tracking based prediction preforms well compared
to recent position based approaches using path models. However,
both the Y-room and T-maze conditions the “cost” predictors are
capable of giving a prediction earlier than the eye tracking based
predictors, but they also make more wrong predictions. On the
other hand, compared to the “Fink, DTW” and “Nescher, Graph”
predictors which have a lowest number of wrong predictions, eye
tracking allows a prediction much earlier.

Looking at the changes in the prediction’s certainty (number of
either correct or incorrect samples to number of undecided sam-

ples) in relation to key geometrical points in Figures 13 and 14, we
can distinguish a number different behaviors. In some cases, there
is an initial increase immediately after the door opens (marked by
the red vertical line). This is the case for both eye tracking and
both cost-based predictors. The second increase happens when the
geometry opens up and allows paths to diverge (blue vertical line).
Some predictors (like “Nescher Graph” for the Y-room and “Fink,
cost” for the T-maze) are able to detect this development well be-
fore the user actually reaches this point while others (“Fink, DTW”
for both conditions) have an increase in certainty immediately af-
terwards, resulting in a steep slope in the classiﬁed to unclassiﬁed
sample ratio. It is noteworthy that the “Arechevaleta, cost” predictor
behaves more like the eye tracking based predictors in this respect.
It shows an initial increase in prediction certainty but than levels off
and is not capable of taking advantage of the diverging paths in the
Y-room condition. While it still exhibits good performance in the
Y-room, for the T-maze this results in a high certainty, high error
output.

For the T-maze condition, the P(τ|G)0.25 predictor and the cost-
based predictors both perform signiﬁcantly better than the the ap-
proach by Nescher et al. However, in the Y-room condition, this
approach performs very well and while it can not predict as early as
the eye tracking and cost-based approaches, it has an exceptionally
good right-to-wrong classiﬁcation ratio. This suggests that different
predictors perform well under certain circumstances and combining
them dependent on the environment or in a voting scheme should
be considered in the future.

However, the problems with the independence of gaze and move-
ment intention discussed in the beginning might be a problem for
the use of eye tracking based prediction. Even in the simple and
clean environment used in this experiment, there was a high vari-
ance between participants in the eye tracking data especially when
compared to the highly stereotypical path behavior. This could also
be the reason that the single sample eye tracking predictors per-
formed poorly and only when averaging over time, the prediction
was stable enough for prediction. This problem can be expected
to intensify in a more visually distractive or busy environment that
will be found in a real world application for Redirected Walking.
In this case, it will probably be necessary to model the gaze behav-
ior to differentiate the baseline gaze behavior from subtle changes
dependent on the intended target, similar to the path models and
comparison in [30].

8 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

The results show that eye tracking is indeed capable of providing
an early prediction of a person’s intended locomotion target. While
the performance in the Y-room condition with a lot of open space
is comparable to the top position based predictors, eye tracking of-
fers a clear advantage for the narrow T-maze layout where it of-
fers a prediction as early as the ”cost” based predictors, but with
a much higher number of correct predictions. It is also capable of
providing a prediction 6.6 meters before the previously used graph-
based approach by Nescher et al. can. However, it never achieves
their 100% correct result, mainly because a number of participants
peeked in the opposite direction while turning at the end of the T-
maze. This is one of the main problems with using eye tracking
data, even in the very clean and empty environment used in this
study, some people looked around to orient themselves and explore
the environment resulting in a relatively high percentage of wrong
predictions.

The second problem with the current formulation of the eye
tracking based predictors is the use of conditional probabilities.
However, since the predictions conditional on the user’s position
did not perform better than the ones depending only on the gaze,
the only remaining dependency is between gaze and target. It is
likely that this is inﬂuenced by the number and visibility of the

57

available targets, but the data in Table 1 shows a very strong bias
towards the intended target. It might therefore be possible to ﬁnd
a environment-independent approximation in which case all condi-
tional probabilities can be determined in advance. In addition, it
should be possible to learn the conditional probabilities over time
by gathering data from users in the respective environment.

To increase the prediction performance in general, a majority
or conﬁdence vote should be added in the future to be able use
multiple predictors simultaneously and combine their predictions.
This could be done by either using a simple voting scheme or by
using different predictors in different zones along the user’s path.

While the eye tracking based prediction has demonstrated good
performance in this experiment, it is necessary to further evaluate
its performance in more visually cluttered environments.
If per-
formance can be conﬁrmed in realistic scenarios, eye tracking can
offer egocentric prediction of locomotion in environments where
position tracking is not available such as applications like pedes-
trian navigation.

In the future, the beneﬁt of the improved prediction on Redi-
rected Walking needs to be evaluated as well. The number of re-
sets required per time should be reduced with improved prediction,
however it is not immediately clear how much improvement can be
achieved with a prediction on this time scale. In order to use the
proposed prediction more easily, it is also necessary to extract the
target points, gaze zones, and paths automatically from the virtual
environment.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors wish to thank the Swiss National Science Foundation,
project number 205121 153243, for funding this work.

REFERENCES

[1] G. Arechavaleta, J.-P. Laumond, H. Hicheur, and A. Berthoz. An op-
timality principle governing human walking. IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, 24(1):5–14, 2008.

[2] P. W. Fink, P. S. Foo, and W. H. Warren. Obstacle avoidance dur-
ing walking in real and virtual environments. ACM Transactions on
Applied Perception, 4(1):2, 2007.

[3] K. Gidl¨of, A. Wallin, R. Dewhurst, and K. Holmqvist. Using eye
tracking to trace a cognitive process: Gaze behaviour during decision
making in a natural environment. Journal of Eye Movement Research,
6(1):1–14, 2013.

[4] R. Grasso, P. Pr´evost, Y. P. Ivanenko, and A. Berthoz. Eye-head co-
ordination for the steering of locomotion in humans: an anticipatory
synergy. Neuroscience Letters, 253(2):115–118, 1998.

[5] H. Groenda, F. Nowak, P. R¨oßler, and U. D. Hanebeck. Telepres-
ence techniques for controlling avatar motion in ﬁrst person games. In
Intelligent Technologies for Interactive Entertainment, pages 44–53.
Springer, 2005.

[6] M. A. Hollands, A. Patla, and J. Vickers.

look where youre going!:
gaze behaviour associated with maintaining and changing the direc-
tion of locomotion. Experimental Brain Research, 143(2):221–230,
2002.

[7] V. Interrante, B. Ries, and L. Anderson. Seven league boots: A new
metaphor for augmented locomotion through moderately large scale
immersive virtual environments. In IEEE Symposium on 3D User In-
terfaces. IEEE, 2007.

[8] A. Jain, H. S. Koppula, B. Raghavan, and A. Saxena. Know before
you do: Anticipating maneuvers via learning temporal driving models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.02789, 2015.

[9] S. Koo and D.-S. Kwon. Recognizing human intentional actions from
the relative movements between human and robot. In The 18th IEEE
International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communi-
cation, pages 939–944. IEEE, 2009.

[10] M. F. Land. The visual control of steering. Vision and action, pages

163–180, 1998.

[11] M. F. Land. Eye movements and the control of actions in everyday
life. Progress in retinal and eye research, 25(3):296–324, 2006.

58

[12] M. F. Land and D. N. Lee. Where do we look when we steer. Nature,

369(6483):742–744, 1994.

[13] D. R. Montello. The Cambridge handbook of visuospatial thinking,
chapter Navigation, pages 257–294. Cambridge University Press,
2005.

[14] T. Nescher, Y.-Y. Huang, and A. Kunz. Planning redirection tech-
niques for optimal free walking experience using model predictive
control. IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces, 2014.

[15] T. Nescher and A. Kunz. Using head tracking data for robust short
term path prediction of human locomotion. In Transactions on Com-
putational Science XVIII: Special Issue on Cyberworlds. Springer,
2013.

[16] N. Nitzsche, U. D. Hanebeck, and G. Schmidt. Motion compression
for telepresent walking in large target environments. Presence: Tele-
operators and Virtual Environments, 13(1):44–60, 2004.

[17] D. Novak, X. Omlin, R. Leins-Hess, and R. Riener. Predicting tar-
gets of human reaching motions using different sensing technolo-
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 60(9):2645–
gies.
2654, 2013.

[18] J. L. Orquin and S. M. Loose. Attention and choice: A review on eye
movements in decision making. Acta psychologica, 144(1):190–206,
2013.

[19] T. Peck, M. Whitton, and H. Fuchs. Evaluation of reorientation tech-
niques for walking in large virtual environments. In VR ’08: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality, pages 121–127. IEEE,
2008.

[20] S. Razzaque, Z. Kohn, and M. C. Whitton. Redirected walking. In

Proceedings of EUROGRAPHICS, volume 9, pages 105–106, 2001.

[21] C. A. Rothkopf, D. H. Ballard, and M. M. Hayhoe. Task and context

determine where you look. Journal of vision, 7(14), 2007.

[22] F. Steinicke, G. Bruder, L. Kohli, J. Jerald, and K. Hinrichs. Taxonomy
and implementation of redirection techniques for ubiquitous passive
haptic feedback. In International Conference on Cyberworlds, pages
217–223. IEEE, 2008.

[23] F. Steinicke, G. Bruder, T. Ropinski, and K. Hinrichs. Moving towards
generally applicable redirected walking. In Proceedings of the Virtual
Reality International Conference, pages 15–24, 2008.

[24] J. Su. Motion compression for telepresence locomotion. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 16(4):385–398, 2007.
[25] J. M. Wiener, O. De Condappa, and C. H¨olscher. Do you have to look
where you go? gaze behaviour during spatial decision making.
In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, pages 1583–1588, 2011.

[26] J. M. Wiener, C. H¨olscher, S. B¨uchner, and L. Konieczny. Gaze be-
haviour during space perception and spatial decision making. Psycho-
logical research, 76(6):713–729, 2012.

[27] B. Williams, G. Narasimham, T. P. McNamara, T. H. Carr, J. J. Rieser,
and B. Bodenheimer. Updating orientation in large virtual environ-
ments using scaled translational gain. In Proceedings of the 3rd sym-
posium on Applied perception in graphics and visualization, pages
21–28. ACM, 2006.

[28] B. Williams, G. Narasimham, B. Rump, T. P. McNamara, T. H. Carr,
J. Rieser, and B. Bodenheimer. Exploring large virtual environments
with an hmd when physical space is limited. In Proceedings of the
4th symposium on Applied perception in graphics and visualization,
pages 41–48. ACM, 2007.

[29] H. C. Yen, H. P. Huang, and S. Y. Chung. Goal-directed pedestrian
model for long-term motion prediction with application to robot mo-
tion planning. In IEEE Workshop on Advanced robotics and Its Social
Impacts, pages 1–6. IEEE, 2008.

[30] M. Zank and A. Kunz. Using locomotion models for estimating walk-
ing targets in immersive virtual environments. In International Con-
ference on Cyberworlds, pages 229–236, 2015.

[31] M. Zmuda, J. L. Wonser, E. R. Bachmann, E. Hodgson, et al. Opti-
mizing constrained-environment redirected walking instructions using
search techniques. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 19(11):1872–1884, 2013.

