In-Sights into Mobile Learning 
An Exploration of Mobile Eye Tracking Methodology for 
Learning in Museums 

 
 

Eva Mayr1, Kristin Knipfer2, Daniel Wessel3 
1 Research Center KnowComm (Danube University Krems, Austria) 
2 Dept. for Applied Cognitive and Media Psychology (University of Tuebingen, Germany) 
3 Knowledge Media Research Center (Tuebingen, Germany) 

 
Overview 
Mobile  eye  tracking  provides  insights  into  cognitive  processing  of  visual  information 
while  a  learner  moves  around.  This  chapter  presents  a  case  study  in  a  small  museum 
exhibition  that  was  conducted  to  explore  the  suitability  of  mobile  eye  tracking  for 
researching mobile learning. The study showed both potentials and limitations of mobile 
eye  tracking  methodology  for  research  on  mobile  learning  in  general  and  in  science 
exhibitions  in  particular:  Mobile  eye  tracking  provides  rich,  non-reactive  data  from  the 
learner’s  perspective  which  can  be  further  analysed  qualitatively  and  quantitatively. 
Concerns  were  raised  with  respect  to  interrelations  of  object  fixations  and  underlying 
include  obtrusiveness,  accuracy,  selective 
cognitive  processes.  Limitations  also 
sampling, ethical concerns, financial effort, and effort of data analysis. These limitations 
suggest  that,  to  increase  validity,  eye  tracking  is  best  used  in  combination  with  other 
methods.  Nonetheless, mobile eye tracking can be a powerful data collection method in 
research on mobile learning. 
 
 
1. Mobile eye tracking 
 
Why  are  eye  movements  interesting  for  mobile  learning?  Our  eyesight  is  our  most 
important sense: most daily tasks involve visual input, and people need to look at objects 
to  acquire information about them. Eye  movements are  not only important for research 
on  natural  human  behaviour  but  especially  on  mobile  learning.  We  define  mobile 
learning  in  the  context  of  this  chapter  as  learning  by  integrating  information  that  is 
spatially  distributed  in  natural  environments  and,  therefore,  requires  movement  of  the 
learner. This book chapter deals with a special case of mobile learning, namely informal 
learning  in  science  museums  (see  also  Lelliott  and  Sharples  in  this  book).  Most 
information  in  exhibitions  is  represented  visually  as  exhibits  with  corresponding  text 
labels. The spatial distribution of exhibits requires that learners move around. We argue 
that methods to examine learning in these visually dominated and spatial environments 
should be chosen carefully in order to address the specifics of the setting, especially the 
high  mobility of the learner. This paper discusses the suitability of tracking visitors’  eye 
movements as a method to explore mobile learning in museums. 
 
1.1 A short history of eye tracking 
 
Research  on  eye  movements  dates  back  to  the  early  20th  century.  Historically,  it 
focused  on  scene  perception  (see  Henderson,  2007)  and  reading  (see  Rayner,  1998). 
Stationary  eye  trackers  were  used  for  the  limited  purpose  of  laboratory  studies 
employing rather simple tasks requiring information processing. Only in recent years has 
the  development  of  light-weight,  mobile  eye  tracking  technologies  (Pelz  et  al.,  2000) 

preprintallowed the assessment of daily activities in a natural environment (e.g., Land & Hayhoe, 
2001). This research has still, however, been limited to rather simple tasks.  
 
1.2 How does mobile eye tracking work? 
 
There  are  different  designs  of  eye  trackers  and  methods  of  analysis  to  determine  the 
location of fixations. However, most mobile eye trackers use two cameras. One camera 
records one eye of the participant, on which three invisible (infrared) dots are projected, 
while  the  other  camera  records  the  scene  from  the  subject’s  perspective.  These  two 
cameras must be calibrated to give accurate data about eye movements and fixations of 
each individual. Both images are saved as alternate frames using a video recorder. The 
most useful output format of mobile eye tracking data is a video that combines the scene 
view  and  the  position  of  the  fixation  indicated  with  a  marker  (e.g.,  small  red  cross).  It 
provides  insight  into  the  perspective  of  the  participant  and  the  point  where  his  or  her 
tracked eye is fixated at a certain moment. This video can be analyzed via conventional 
video-analysis software. 
Fixations  and  saccades  are  the  basic  objects  of  the  analysis  of  eye  tracking  data 
(Rayner,  1998).  During  fixations,  eyes  are  focused  on  one  location  and  visual 
information  is  obtained.  Saccades  are  rapid  eye  movements  between  fixations  when 
visual input is reduced or even totally suppressed. 
 
2. Re-viewing the museum visitor’s view - an explorative study 
 
The  aim  of  this  study  was  mainly  an  exploratory  one:  We  wanted  to  examine  the 
potentials  and  limitations  of  mobile  eye  tracking  for  research  on  informal  learning  in 
museums.  Mobile  eye  tracking  allowed  us  to  ‘re-view’  the  visitors’  view  –  beyond 
observational or questionnaire methods. In this way, we hoped to literally ‘see’ what eye 
movements  can  tell  us  about  exploration  behaviour  in  exhibitions  and  information 
processing  of  exhibition  content.  To  supplement  our  observations,  we  performed  a 
literature review on mobile eye tracking. However, in the literature we only found mobile 
eye  tracking  studies  which  examine  well-structured,  temporally  restricted  tasks  like 
making  a  sandwich,  finding  a  specific  door,  or  washing  one’s  hands  (e.g.,  Hayhoe  & 
Ballard,  2005;  Land  &  Hayhoe,  2001;  Pelz  et  al.,  2000;  Turano,  Geruschat,  &  Baker, 
2003).  Our study, in contrast, took place in  a complex setting  with  a  more open-ended 
task:  the  exploration  of  a  science  exhibition.  This  is  an  example  of  a  setting  in  which 
informal learning is likely to take place. As the exhibition was designed to communicate 
the  basic  facts  and  figures,  chances  and  risks,  and  areas  and  concrete  applications  of 
nanotechnology, we consider the exploration of the exhibition a learning task. However, 
as with many informal settings, the subjects had not been instructed ‘to learn’, nor were 
they  provided  with  other  concrete  instructions  concerning  the  exploration  of  the 
exhibition  (like  learning  goals,  time  restrictions,  predefined  learning  activities;  see  for 
example the chapter by Sharples in this book). Corresponding to the ‘open’ nature of this 
task,  a  broad  range  of  visiting  behaviour  was  found:  for  example,  the  duration  of  the 
visits ranged from 17 to 57 minutes. 
 
 
2.1 Method 
 
Setting.  We  had  the  opportunity  to  present  a  small  exhibition  about  nanotechnology  at 
our  research  institute.  In  this  way,  we  ensured  a  fair  amount  of  external  and  internal 
validity: The research setting was designed to be as close as possible to a ‘normal’ visit 

preprintfor participants  and  at  the  same time  as controlled as possible to  reduce the  impact  of 
interfering variables.  
 
Technical  equipment.  For  this  study  we  used  an  ASL  MobileEye  eye  tracker  (see 
Figure 1). 
 

[Insert figure 1 approximately here] 

insight 

interview  provided 

 
Sample. Two male adults and one female adult with normal vision were asked to explore 
the exhibition with an eye tracker.  
 
Procedure.  First,  the  purpose  of  the  study  and  the  function  of  the  eye  tracker  were 
explained to the subjects. Then, the eye tracker was calibrated to a distance that visitors 
would normally keep  while looking at exhibits (which varied interindividually and ranged 
between 30 and 60 cm). The study participants were instructed to explore the exhibition 
as  they  would  normally  do  in  a  science  museum.  After  exploration  of  the  exhibition,  a 
into  visitors’  subjective  experiences  and 
structured 
introspective thoughts on reasons for exploration behaviour and on cognitive processes. 
For  example,  the  participants  were  encouraged  to  report  on  criteria  and  reasons  for 
information  selection  (e.g.,  “Which  exhibits  were  particularly  interesting  for  you  and 
why?”) and their spatial orientation and sequence of exhibit exploration (“Did you explore 
the exhibits in a certain order or randomly?”).  
 
Analysis. Eye movement recordings were transformed to .avi-files and analyzed with the 
video  analysis  software  Videograph©.  Similarly  to  Turano  et  al.  (2003),  we  did  not 
analyze eye movements based on xy-coordinates (examining which points on a wall are 
fixated  independent  of  their  denotation),  but  based  on  elements  and  categories 
(examining  which  exhibits  on  a  wall  are  fixated).  For  our  purposes,  fixations  of  similar 
elements  or  within  the  same  object  category  were  of  higher  interest  than  proximity  of 
fixations.  Also,  elements  and  categories  are  more  easily  adjusted  to  background 
changes  than  xy-coordinates  would  be.  This  makes  them  better  suited  to  analyze 
complex mobile eye movement recordings. The categories were developed according to 
information  elements  of  the  exhibition  (see  Figure  2).  Each  exhibit  or  text  unit  was  an 
element.  Elements  were  grouped  in  larger  categories  like  “exhibits  with  corresponding 
labels” or “exhibits on the same concept.”  
 

[Insert figure 2 approximately here] 

 
2.2 Exemplary results of the study 
 
This exploratory study on mobile eye tracking provided information both about the way a 
visitor explores the exhibition and about the usefulness of this method for gaining insight 
into mobile, informal learning. The following exemplary results may illustrate the kind and 
quality of information that is obtained by means of mobile eye tracking.  
 
Intra-individual  analysis  of  each  visitor’s  eye  tracking  recording  revealed  that  exhibits 
belonging  together  conceptually  are  more  likely  to  be  fixated  successively  and  also 
several  times  alternately  (see  Figure  2  for  an  example)  than  adjacent  but  unrelated 
exhibits.  This  may  indicate  that  people  integrate  multiple  information  units  into  an 
underlying  concept  (Rayner,  Rotello,  Stewart,  Keir,  &  Duffy,  2001)  or  at  least  that  they 

preprinttracking,  Rayner 

do  not  process  these  information  units  independently  from  one  another  (Schwonke, 
Berthold,  &  Renkl,  2007).  However,  in  one  case,  our  post-visit  interview  revealed  a 
different explanation for  alternate fixation of objects: One participant stated that he was 
not  comparing  the  content  but  the design of the  exhibition elements. Both explanations 
of  the  participant’s  eye  movements  indicate  that  conceptually  intertwined  exhibits  were 
processed  together.  However,  eye  movement  recordings  alone  cannot  reveal  which 
information  is  being  processed  (in  our  case:  semantic  information  or  information  about 
design) or what cognitive processes exactly are going on. 
 
Analysis across all three participants showed that, overall, some exhibits were less likely 
to be explored than others. This might be due to limitations in exhibition design: research 
has  shown  that  the  probability  of  visual  exploration  depends  on  the  visual  salience  of 
objects  (e.g.,  Holsanova,  Rahm,  &  Holmqvist,  2006).  An  alternative  explanation  is  that 
these parts of the exhibition were attended to without direct fixations (Treisman, 2006). 
 
All participants first scanned each exhibition wall as a whole (the exhibition consisted of 
four exhibition walls arranged as a circle). They then began to explore single exhibits in 
their  vicinity.  Research  suggests  that  the  first  process  serves  as  initial  selection  of 
information and visual search – and is rather automated (Holmberg, 2004). During early 
processing stages, pictorial information or text is quickly skimmed and scanned, so that 
a viewer gets the gist of a scene very quickly (see for example Rayner, 1998, p. 398f.).  
 
In a second step, late processing like reading text or exploring details of objects occurs. 
However,  there  are  multiple  exploration  patterns  for  the  same  scene:  in  his  review  on 
that  exploration  patterns  are  especially 
eye 
heterogeneous in scene perception. This is even more likely in our natural setting, as the 
circular arrangement of the exhibition elements did not trigger a certain exploration path 
but  provided  multiple  entry  points  and  exploration  directions.  An  exhibition  also  easily 
allows for multiple changes between the exhibition elements.  
 
2.3 Discussion of the study 
 
Our  results  from  three  visitors’  eye  tracking  data  are  difficult  to  generalize  for  three 
reasons.  First,  the  sample  size  is  small;  further  subjects  are  needed  to  allow 
generalization  of  our  results.  Second,  the  ill-structured  task  of  visiting  an  exhibition 
resulted in highly diverse inter-individual behaviour, which is difficult to compare across 
subjects. To identify common patterns across subjects, more clearly defined tasks or at 
least reduction of the amount of data per visitor would be necessary. Third, data analysis 
was  not  based  on  a-priori  hypotheses;  we  tried  to  find  explanations  for  patterns  a-
posteriori.  To validate the presented results from this study, further  research  has to be 
conducted with larger samples and pre-defined tasks.  
 
Still,  the  results  of  this  study  provide  a  first  insight  into  informal  mobile  learning  in 
museums: We were able to identify common eye movement patterns, which allowed us 
to  generate  hypotheses  about  information  processing  in  an  exhibition  (conceptually 
heterogeneous exhibits are fixated successively; an exhibition wall is first skimmed then 
explored in detail). These hypotheses can be tested in further studies. We also identified 
elements in the exhibition that are less likely to be explored. This result could be used to 
improve the design of exhibitions by changing salience, position, and information density 
of less popular exhibition elements. 
 

(1998)  states 

preprint3. Potentials and limitations of mobile eye tracking 
 
Based  on  mobile  eye  tracking  literature  and  our  own  exploratory  study,  we  identified 
several  potentials  of  mobile  eye  tracking  for  research  on  mobile,  informal  learning. 
Though  the  advantages  of  mobile eye tracking for examining  mobile  learning are  more 
apparent and also very appealing, we would also like to allude to some limitations which 
might be easily overlooked or underestimated. 
 
3.1 Potentials of mobile eye tracking 
 
Data richness. Eye tracking provides rich, continuous data of natural viewing behaviour 
and – in the case of mobile eye tracking – also the context of this behaviour. In contrast 
to other tracking methods (e.g., logfile analyses, see for example Trinder, Roy, & Magill 
and  Wali,  Oliver,  &  Winters  in  this  book),  eye  tracking  can  additionally  provide  insight 
into planning behaviour that requires visual input but does not result in easily observable 
action.  For  example,  a  visitor  visually  explores  two  different  walls  from  a  distance  and 
then  moves  to  one  of  them  to  explore  it  in  detail.  External  observation  (e.g.,  by  video 
surveillance) can only show the visitor’s actual movements towards one of the walls but 
not his or her prior visual exploration of both walls. 
 
Data validity. Since the actual fixations are recorded objectively by means of a camera, 
the  validity  of  mobile  eye  tracking  is  higher  than  the  validity  of  external  observation: 
External observation can only determine the direction in which a person turns his or her 
head  and  moves  but  not  the  point  on  which  his  or  her  eyes  are  fixated.  Since  eye 
tracking  data  is  obtained  from  the  acting  subject’s  perspective,  it  reduces  perspective 
errors as well. 
 
In  contrast  to  retrospective  questionnaires/interviews,  eye  tracking  gathers  data  online, 
that  is,  during  actual  behaviour.  If  one  considers  the  amount,  the  immediacy,  and  the 
objectiveness of measurement – no error-prone memory or verbalization is needed (e.g., 
Nisbett & Wilson, 1977) – it becomes apparent that eye tracking can provide insights into 
unconscious 
introspectively  accessible 
processing (Pelz et al., 2000). 
 
Mobile eye tracking by means of light-weight head-mounted cameras brings eye tracking 
out of the laboratory into the natural environment. Behaviour can be measured where it 
naturally occurs, providing data with high external validity.  
 
Non-reactive  measurement. Data-collecting  methods like  questionnaires and interviews 
are  considered  to  be  highly  reactive  (Fritsche  &  Linneweber,  2006).  In  contrast,  eye 
movements are natural behaviour that can hardly be manipulated by the tracked subject, 
especially not over longer periods of continuous measurement. While participants might 
report in an interview that they did not see a particular piece of information, mobile eye 
tracking can  reveal that they did at least look at it – even if they say otherwise for  any 
reason or simply do not remember it. 
 
Statistical  analysis.  Similar  to  other  tracking  methods,  data  from  eye  tracking  is  highly 
structured and allows for further statistical analysis. Relevant data that can be extracted 
from  the  raw  data  are,  for  example,  fixation  durations,  saccade  length  and  degree, 
occurrences  of  specific  events,  holding  power  of  exhibits  or  navigation  sequences  (to 
determine  scan  patterns,  see  for  example  Henderson,  2003).  Eye  tracking  can  also 

information  processing 

lies  beyond 

that 

preprintreveal  interesting  details  about  information  processing:  for  example,  which  information 
has been  missed,  which information is fixated longer than other information, what gaze 
patterns occurred overall, or what differences in gaze patterns across participants and/or 
experimental groups exist.  
 
3.2 Limitations of mobile eye tracking 
 
Covert  attention  and  mental  spotlight.  The  first  and  most  important  limitation  is  the 
limited  interpretation  of  a  location  of  a  fixation  with  respect  to  attention  processes. 
Treisman  (2006,  p.  4)  stated  that “the  window of attention set by the  parietal scan can 
take  on  different  apertures,  to  encompass  anything  from  a  finely  localized  object  to  a 
global  view  of the  surrounding scene”. Therefore, eye tracking in fact delivers  accurate 
data  about  eye  fixations,  but  this  data  does  not  always  lead  to  correct  conclusions 
regarding  the  focus of  attention.  For  informal learning in  museums, this  means  while  a 
participant’s eye is fixating  a specific exhibit, he may actually be attending to the whole 
exhibition  wall  without  devoting  attention  to  the  fixated  exhibit  itself,  or  he  may  be 
thinking about something completely different while his gaze still lingers on that specific 
exhibit. 
 
Limited conclusions about cognitive processing. A related problem is the limited validity 
of the interpretation of eye movements. “Whereas a given cognitive event might reliably 
lead  to  a  particular  fixation,  the  fixation  itself  does  not  uniquely  specify  the  cognitive 
event”  (Hayhoe  &  Ballard,  2005,  p.  190).  Interpretations  of  eye  tracking  data  are  often 
based  on  assumptions  and  heuristics  about  underlying  cognitive  processes.  We  may 
have  an objective recording of a person’s eye  movements, but the cognitive processes 
that take place in the meanwhile are subject to interpretation. 
 
One  problem  here  is  that  eye  movements  are  determined  by  two  processes,  namely 
bottom-up,  stimulus-led  processes  triggered  by  salience  of  stimuli  and  top-down, 
cognitively-led  processes  based  on  prior  knowledge  and  goals  of 
the  subject 
(Henderson,  2003).  Whereas  the  influence  of  bottom-up  processes  can  be  modelled 
(Turano  et  al.,  2003),  data  on  a  person’s  reasons  for  specific  behaviour  cannot  be 
obtained by eye tracking. Cognitive processes cannot be observed directly through eye 
movements. Such top-down processes might be modelled more easily for clearly defined 
tasks, but only with great difficulty for open tasks like those involved in mobile, informal 
learning.  
 
The example from our explorative study – when our interpretation of a participant’s eye 
movement was proven to be incorrect by the interview – illustrates the limited validity of 
conclusions from eye tracking data on underlying cognitive processes. 
 
Obtrusiveness  of  measurement.  In  contrast  to  static  eye  tracking  embedded  into 
computer  monitors,  a  mobile  eye  tracker  is  obtrusive  for  both  the  subject  wearing  the 
camera(s)  and  his  or  her  environment:  Participants  wearing  goggles  know  that  their 
gazes are tracked, and the unfamiliar feeling may bother them. Other people can clearly 
see the eye tracker and, thus, they might interact differently with the person wearing it. 
This holds especially for informal settings like museums, which are highly social settings 
(Gammon, 2004). While this  was not relevant for our study, since  we  allowed only one 
visitor  in  the  exhibition  at  each  time,  this  might  be  a  major  problem  in  more  natural 
settings.  
 

preprintSelective sampling. Mobile eye tracking devices are difficult to calibrate for persons with 
glasses  or  corneal  irregularity.  Therefore,  usually  only  people  with  normal  vision  are 
invited  to  participate  in  eye  tracking  studies.  This  might  impair  the  generalization  of 
results from eye tracking: If visual impairment is correlated with other relevant variables, 
this restriction leads to a biased sample.  
 
Limited  temporal  and  spatial  accuracy.  The  temporal  resolution  depends  on  the 
recording  of eye tracking images. A 50 Hz PAL DVCR tape in a mobile recorder saves 
two  camera  images  by  alternating  frames.  This  results  in  a  resolution  of  25  Hz.  Given 
that  short  fixations  of  about  33  ms  were  observed  (Pelz  et  al.,  2000),  this  means  that 
some fixations can easily be missed.  
 
Eye  tracking  works  best  if  the  system  is  calibrated  to  a  specific  fixation  distance.  Yet 
fixation distance  is  not constant  in  mobile settings but rather changing constantly. As a 
consequence,  spatial  accuracy  of  mobile  eye  tracking  systems  is  worse  than  that  of 
stationary  systems.  We  tried  to  reduce  this  problem  by  calibrating  the  device  at  a 
distance  the  participants  would  typically  keep  to  an  exhibit  wall.  However,  in  other 
settings with an even wider range of fixation distances (e.g., a museum with large rooms 
and  exhibits  with  a  broad  range  of  sizes)  this  limitation  becomes  a  problem  for  mobile 
eye tracking. 
 
Laborious  data  analysis.  With  a stationary  eye tracker and  a given  background (e.g., a 
website),  software  for  automatic  data  analysis  is  available.  However,  in  mobile  eye 
tracking,  automatic  analysis  is  limited:  the  background  changes  constantly  and  the 
inter-individually  variable. 
participants’  behaviour  and  eye  movements  are  very 
Therefore,  each  eye  tracking  recording  has  to  be  analyzed  manually.  To  automate  the 
process,  software  would  be  necessary  that  can  recognize  the  elements  on  the  video 
frame and combine this information with eye tracking data. As far as we know, there is 
currently  no  software  capable  of  doing  so.  Thus,  many  studies  use  only  short  tasks 
where  inter-individual  similar  eye  movements  can  be  expected  (e.g.,  Land  &  Hayhoe, 
2001), which unfortunately limits the generalization of eye tracking data to more complex 
(learning) tasks. 
 
Price.  Mobile  eye  trackers  are  expensive;  for  example,  the  version  used  in  our  study 
costs  about  24000 € .  The  price  of  the  equipment  limits  the  number  of  simultaneous 
measurements  within  dyads  or  groups  that  could  be  useful  in  order  to  explore 
collaborative  learning  and  social  engagement.  However,  instructions  on  how  to  build 
mobile  eye  trackers  using  off-the-shelf  components  at  a  cost  of  about  350  USD  have 
been presented recently (see for example Li & Parkhurst, 2006).  
 
Ethical  concerns. As  eye tracking  also gathers data about unconscious or uncontrolled 
eye  movements,  participants  have  no  control  about  the  information  they  reveal  during 
eye  tracking.  Even  if  they  have  previously  agreed  to  the  study,  participants  might  be 
embarrassed by a confrontation with their eye tracking videos. The videos might reveal 
information they would rather have kept private.  
 
We  propose the following procedure to meet these ethical concerns: Study participants 
should  be  briefed  which  data  will  be  gathered  and  how  it  will  be  analyzed,  and  be 
informed  about  the  general  purpose  of  the  eye  tracking  study  prior  to  data  collection 
(e.g., via a sample video). When participants are confronted with their video feed during 
data  analysis, only the  interviewing  researcher should  be  with them.  Before  publication 

preprintof  image  or  video  files  for  any  audience,  participants  must  be  asked  for  permission. 
Regarding  the  privacy  of  the  people  who  are  recorded  on  the  eye  tracking  video,  the 
same conditions as in photography should be applied. 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
Given the described limitations, eye tracking should be combined with other methods to 
increase the validity of interpretations. Such triangulation is recommended for other data 
gathering methods – see for example the chapters by Lelliott; Sharples; and Wali et al. in 
this  book.  Conclusions  from  eye  movements  about  underlying  cognitive  processes  are 
error-prone  (Hayhoe  &  Ballard,  2005).  To  reduce  interpretation  bias,  clear  a-priori 
hypotheses  about  cognitive  processes  and  their  influence  on  eye  movements  are 
indispensable.  Interview  and  questionnaire  data  about  a  person’s  interests  and  prior 
knowledge  can  be  used  to  examine  hypotheses  with  the  data  at  hand,  like  in  the 
exploratory  study  presented.  A  combination  of  eye  tracking  with  Personal  Meaning 
Mapping  (see  Lelliott  in  this  book)  could  be  interesting  for  the  purpose  of  explaining 
changes  between  PM-maps  before  and  after  a  museum  visit.  An  alternative  is  to 
confront visitors with their own eye movement record after the visit and ask them to think 
aloud. 
 
An important question is whether data should be analyzed intra- or inter-individually. As 
eye  tracking  data  are  very  rich,  large  samples  are  rarely  used  (for  an  exception,  see 
Wooding,  2002),  while  the  degree  to  which  results  from  small  samples  can  be 
generalized  is  limited.  Especially  in  the  context  of  complex,  ill-defined  problems  (like 
visiting  an  exhibition),  comparisons  across  subjects  are  restricted  because  of  highly 
inter-individually variable behaviour.  To  be  able to generalize results, pre-defined tasks 
should  be  used.  Still,  exploratory  case  studies  –  like  the  one  presented  here  –  can 
provide  important insights into how information is processed  and how informal learning 
happens on the move.  
 
Further  technical  development  of  mobile  eye  tracking  devices  will  probably  eliminate 
some  of  the  technical  and  pragmatic  constraints  of  mobile  eye  tracking  (e.g.,  fixation 
distance, costs, temporal and spatial accuracy). Development of software that supports 
automated  analysis  of  real-world-videos  with  changing  angles,  views,  distances,  and 
objects is needed to reduce the complexity of the analysis of eye tracking data. 
 
Despite  some  limitations,  mobile  eye  tracking  is  a  powerful  data  collection  method  in 
mobile  learning  research.  Previous  research  has  used  mobile  eye  tracking  to  study 
behavioural  planning,  coordination  of  vision  and  action,  and  visual  search  (Hayhoe  & 
Ballard, 2005; Land & Hayhoe, 2001; Pelz et al., 2000; Turano et al., 2003). The study 
presented here is the first to address information processing within the context of mobile 
learning by means of mobile eye tracking. In our exploratory study, we gained valuable 
in-sights  into  the  information  processing  performed  by  museum  visitors.  Although  the 
presented  interpretations  of  our  results  need  further  validation,  we  would  have  hardly 
gained  these  findings  otherwise.  For  this  reason,  we  would  like  to  encourage  further 
research on mobile learning using mobile eye tracking. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 

preprintThis  research  was  conducted  within  the  research  project  “Learning  in  museums:  The 
role of media” (see http://www.iwm-kmrc.de/museum/), funded by the "Pact for Research 
and Innovation" of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research.  
We would like to thank Viktoria Schuster for her help in analyzing the data. 
 
References 

Fritsche, I. & Linneweber, V. (2006). Nonreactive Methods in Psychological Research. In 
M.  Eid,  &  E.  Diener  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  Multimethod  Measurement  in  Psychology. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association (APA), pp. 189-203. 

Gammon,  B.  (2004).  Design  for  Museum  Visitors.  Paper  presented  at  UK  Usability 
Professional’s 
at 
Association. 
http://ukupa.org.uk/events/presentations/science_museum.pdf [04-02-07] 

Available 

Hayhoe,  M.  &  Ballard,  D.  (2005).  Eye  Movements  in  Natural  Behavior.  TRENDS  in 
Cognitive Science, 9, pp. 188-194. 

Henderson,  J.M.  (2003).  Human  Gaze  Control  during  Real-World  Scene  Perception. 
TRENDS in Cognitive Science, 7, pp. 498-504. 

Henderson,  J.M.  (2007).  Regarding  Scenes.  Current  Directions  in  Psychological 
Science, 16, pp. 219-222. 

Holmberg,  N.  (2004).  Eye  Movement  Patterns  and  Newspaper  Design  Factors:  An 
Experimental  Approach.  Master 
at 
Thesis, 
http://theses.lub.lu.se/archive/2006/04/12/1144841530-20432-695/NilsHolmberg.pdf  [06-
25-07] 

Lund  University.  Available 

Holsanova, J., Rahm, H., & Holmqvist, K. (2006). Entry Points and Reading Paths on the 
Newspaper  Spread:  Comparing  Semiotic  Analysis  with  Eye-Tracking  Measurements. 
Visual Communication, 5(1), pp. 65-93.  

Kliegl,  R., Nuthmann, A., & Engbert, R. (2006). Tracking the Mind During Reading: The 
Influence  of  Past,  Present,  and  Future  Words  on  Fixation  Durations.  Journal  of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 135(1), pp. 12-35. 

Land,  M.F.  &  Hayhoe,  M.  (2001).  In  What  Ways  Do  Eye  Movements  Contribute  to 
Everyday Activities? Vision Research, 41, pp. 3559-3565. 

Li, D. & Parkhurst, D.J. (2006). OpenEyes: An Open-Hardware Open Source System for 
Low-Cost Eye Tracking. Journal of Modern Optics, 53(9), pp.1295-1311. 

Nisbett,  R.E. &  Wilson,  T.D. (1977).  Telling  More than  We  Can Know:   Verbal  Reports 
on Mental Processes. Psychological Review, 84(3), pp. 231-259. 

Pelz,  J.B.,  Canosa,  R.L.,  Kucharczyk,  D.,  Babcock,  J.,  Silver,  A.,  &  Konno,  D.  (2000). 
Portable  Eye  Tracking:  A  Study  of  Natural  Eye  Movements.  In  B.E.  Rogowitz  &  T.N. 

preprintPappas  (Eds.),  Human  Vision  and  Electronic  Imaging  V  (Proceedings  of  SPIE,  Vol. 
3959). SPIE, pp. 566-582. 

Rayner, K. (1998). Eye Movements in Reading and Information Processing: 20 Years of 
Research. Psychological Bulletin, 124, pp. 372-422. 

Rayner,  K.,  Rotello,  C.M.,  Stewart,  A.J.  Keir,  J.,  &  Duffy,  S.A.  (2001).  Integrating  Text 
and  Pictorial  Information:  Eye  Movements  when  Looking  at  Print  Advertisements. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 7, pp. 219-226. 

Schwonke, R., Berthold, K., & Renkl, A. (2007, August). How Do Learners Actually Use 
Multiple  External  Representations?  An  Analysis  of  Eye  Movements  and  Learning 
Outcomes.  Paper  presented  at  the  12th  Biennial  Conference  of  the  European 
Association  for  Learning  and  Instruction  (EARLI).  Budapest,  Hungary.  Available  at: 
http://earli2007.hu/nq/home/scientific_program/programme/proposal_view/&abstractid=1
89 [10-11-2007]. 

Treisman, A. (2006). How the Deployment of Attention Determines What We See. Visual 
Cognition, 14, pp. 411-443. 

Turano,  K.A.,  Geruschat,  D.R.,  &  Baker,  F.H.  (2003).  Oculomotor  Strategies  for  the 
Direction of Gaze Tested with a Real-World Activity. Vision Research, 43, pp. 333-346. 

Wooding,  D.S.  (2002).  Fixation  Maps:  Quantifying  Eye-Movement  Traces.  In  A.T. 
Duchowski,  R.  Vertegaal,  &  J.W.  Senders  (Eds.),  Proceedings  of  the  Eyetracking 
Research & Application Symposium, ETRA 2002. New York: ACM Press, pp. 31-34. 
 
List of figures 
Figure 1. ASL MobileEye eye tracker (initial design October 2004). 
Figure  2. One participant’s  episode  of 17 seconds. Ascending  numbers show the scan 
path (fixations 1-25). Red borders highlight object categories. Attend to the fact that the 
participant  fixated  different  objects  conceptually  belonging  together  several  times 
alternately  (fixations  13-24,  where  three  subcategories  were  fixated  that  compare 
different size measurements, here from cm to µm).  
 
 

preprint