Inferring Art Preferences from Gaze Exploration in a Museum

Sylvain Castagnos
CNRS - LORIA - Univ. of Lorraine
Vandoeuvre, France
sylvain.castagnos@loria.fr

Florian Marchal
CNRS - LORIA - Univ. of Lorraine
Vandoeuvre, France
florian.marchal@loria.fr

Alexandre Bertrand
IDMC - Univ. of Lorraine
Nancy, France

alexandre.bertrand5@etu.univ-lorraine.fr

Morgane Colle
IDMC - Univ. of Lorraine
Nancy, France
morgane.colle8@etu.univ-lorraine.fr

Djalila Mahmoudi
IDMC - Univ. of Lorraine
Nancy, France
djalila.mahmoudi2@etu.univ-lorraine.fr

ABSTRACT
This paper is a first step towards identifying the links between
the characteristics of gaze behaviour and visitor preferences in a
museum. In the long term, the real-time analysis of visitors’ gaze
should allow a fine estimation of their interest for the different
artworks exhibited and should replace the fastidious and time-
consuming elicitation of preferences commonly used in traditional
recommender systems. To study these links, we carried out a user
study at the Nancy Museum of Fine Arts in the North-East of France.
This pilot study involved 13 volunteers who had the opportunity to
freely explore the museum and contemplate hundreds of artworks
for more than 50 minutes on average in May 2018. We were able to
analyze millions of fixation points so as to find correlations between
the number of fixation points per painting, the time spent looking
at a painting, and whether or not this painting is appreciated. We
plan to extend this study to 100 visitors in the coming months.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → User studies; • Information
systems → Recommender systems.

KEYWORDS
cultural heritage, implicit user modelling, gaze behaviour, user
study

ACM Reference Format:
Sylvain Castagnos, Florian Marchal, Alexandre Bertrand, Morgane Colle,
and Djalila Mahmoudi. 2019. Inferring Art Preferences from Gaze Explo-
ration in a Museum. In 27th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and
Personalization Adjunct (UMAP’19 Adjunct), June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3314183.3323871

1 INTRODUCTION
Museums are places of art and culture. Very diverse, they are present
all over the world, whether in small towns or in capitals, and brew

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
UMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus
© 2019 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6711-0/19/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3314183.3323871

an audience with very broad horizons, from the art expert to the cu-
rious tourist. To attract visitors, museums must reinvent themselves,
propose new services, and take advantage of the digital revolution
to transform the visitor experience. Museum guides open the way
to more interactivity, more content, and allow visitors’ paths to be
personalized thank to recommender systems.

In this context, the goal of recommender systems is to maximize
visitor satisfaction by ensuring, for example, that they do not miss
works that may interest them [16], surprise them or experience
positive emotions whatever their level of knowledge in art [18],
that they learn something [9] and/or that they engage a reflection
around a theme [8]. In order to achieve these goals, a recommender
system must build a reliable profile of the active user. However,
collecting visitors’ museum preferences is a very difficult task. Cul-
tural heritage suffers far more from cold start than other application
domains like VOD, online music services or e-commerce. Indeed,
visitors often come only once to the museum, meaning that the
user modelling process has to be achieved in a single session. To
initialize the profiles, it is possible to ask the visitors to choose
exhibits that they like in the catalog before the visit, in the same
way they choose a small panel of TV shows or films when they
connect for the first time to a service like Netflix.1 Nevertheless, it
is difficult for visitors to form an opinion on exhibits from thumb-
nails, as the feeling is not the same. In addition, visiting time should
be primarily spent exploring the museum, rather than making the
preferences explicit in a mobile application.

Recently, within the frame of the European project H2020 Cross-
Cult2, we have proposed a recommender system based on visitors’
behaviours in museums [17]. These recommendations in a mu-
seum context presuppose to have the location of visitors to whom
they address. By observing the way they behave in the museum,
we aim at inferring their implicit preferences and characteristics
on-the-fly during their visit. We argue that this is a good way to
support CH exploration for first-time and anonymous visitors, by
recommending them a personalized route that is dynamically re-
computed periodically according to where they go, what they see
and how they behave. We can for example hypothesize that the
time spent looking at a specific painting may reveal an interest for
this painting. This hypothesis has to be validated so as to confirm
the relevance of a recommender system based on visitor behaviour.
In order to do so, we designed a user study in the museum of fine

1https://www.netflix.com/
2https://www.crosscult.eu/

Personalized access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2019) WorkshopUMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus425arts of Nancy3 in which visitors are free to explore the museum
while wearing eye-tracking glasses and to provide their preferences
regarding the exhibits of the museum at the end of the visit. Our
goal is then to see if we can find correlations between some gaze
data and the expressed preferences. Such correlations would tend
to prove that it is possible to use exploratory and gaze behaviour to
infer visitor preferences and adapt recommendations accordingly.
We conducted a pilot study with 13 participants and we will discuss
the results in this paper.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 will
present the state-of-the-art as regards the analysis of visitors’ be-
haviour in museums. Section 3 will introduce our research hypoth-
esis. Section 4 will describe our experiment protocol. Section 5 will
summarize the results of our user study. Finally we will conclude
the paper and present our perspectives.

2 RELATED WORK
Museum institutions have the desire to know their audience. Indeed,
the large number of surveys carried out by questionnaire testifies
to this [3, 4]. These surveys aim to gather on-site information
about their visitors such as gender, age, educational level, family
status, the means of transportation to the museum, the intention
to visit, the duration of the visit, the cost or the motivations. There
are also national surveys. In France, for example, the Ministry of
Culture publishes each year a report entitled Patriostat on museum
attendance [5]. All these reports allow to know if a collection or
a temporary exhibition was successful, and at the same time, to
know the public for each collection or more widely for each type of
museum - Fine Arts, Contemporary Art, Archeology, Military, etc.
In parallel, some studies aim at determining the visitors’ profile
– socio-professional category, personal characteristics – and their
behaviours, which can be studied for example via architectural or
ethnographic approaches.

The architectural approach, also called spatial syntax, is a field of
research initiated in the 1980s by Hillier and Hanson. The purpose
of their work was to highlight the link between the architecture of
the place and the activity of people, alone or in groups, whether
they are living or visiting the place. The basic idea is that archi-
tectural variables have a social dimension. Thus, according to this
paradigm, architecture prefigures behaviour, influences and condi-
tions social relations. Among the 3 interesting variables from this
area of research, the permeability determines, for a given space,
the ability of an individual to move from one room to another. The
permeability will be high if a large number of doors or transitional
spaces - corridors, lifts - allow free movement. Another important
notion in spatial syntax is visibility: what an individual can perceive
from a given point in space. Benedikt names this two-dimensional
space surface an isovist, and has studied its various properties [13].
According to him, isosists affect our judgment of space, and could
therefore predict it in a closed architectural space. Finally, the third
variable is the sequencing: the classical architectural plans are trans-
formed into undirected related graphs, with the nodes representing
the museum rooms and the edges the permeability relationships.
While the architectural approach makes it possible to draw the
main behavioural trends of a population, it struggles to explain

3https://musee-des-beaux-arts.nancy.fr/

individual behaviours. Other studies then approach the analysis
of visitor behaviour from an ethnographic point of view. Veron
and Levasseur carried out a study during which they observed
the routes, attitudes and comments of of the visitors [21]. A video
recording device was used to track the movements of individuals.
After their visit, the visitors were thoroughly interviewed. Course
analysis resulted in five categories, which were eventually reduced
to four types of visitors (ants, fishes, grasshoppers, and butterflies).
The classification was made on the basis of the mode of crossing
the space, the distance at which the visitor looks at a work, the
order of the visit and the variations of this order. The ants stand
at a relatively close distance from the works, scrupulously follow
the chronology of the exhibition, read their descriptions and rarely
cross the empty spaces. The fishes describe a circular trend trajec-
tory while remaining in the center of the room. They give little time
to visit and rarely stop. Grasshoppers make successive leaps punctu-
ated by stops at exhibits that interest them. Finally, butterflies have
an unpredictable course, guided by chance or for their attraction
to certain exhibits. This topology was made from data collected
in a single showroom. Zancarano et al. [23] sought to validate the
classification of Veron and Levasseur. To do this, they equipped
143 subjects with a guide device, for the visit of the Torre Aquila
museum in Italy. An infrared transmitter and receiver system was
used to locate visitors and record their movements. They then used
the empirical data they collected – visit time, percentage of exhibits
seen, order of the visit – and have managed to categorize them
into 4 clusters using two supervised learning techniques: a Recur-
rent Artificial Neural Network and Kmeans. They then compared
the characteristics of the clusters with the Veron and Levasseur
categories, which favours the validation of the classification. Subse-
quently, as a continuation of this study, Kuflik et al. [11] wanted to
know if the different types of behaviour could be predicted during
the early stages of visits. For this, they collected visitor data to be
able to model their behaviour by a vector every two minutes, cu-
mulatively, and tried to predict the type of visitor at early stages of
the visit. The results show that the quality of the predictions varies
according to the category of visit and the moment at which the
prediction is made. The authors show that visitors do not always
behave consistently - they may change their style during the visit.
However, the prediction of their type of visit at early stages remains
possible.

Although the classification of Veron and Levasseur is widely
used, it is not the only one. For example, Falk [6], in a study fo-
cusing on what visitors remember from their visits and what they
remember about them learn, studied transcripts of telephone in-
terviews of 22 subjects who had visited museums in the last six
months. From this study, he constructed five categories of visitors,
based on what motivates them to come to the museum: the Ex-
plorers, motivated by their curiosity; the Facilitators, who see the
visits as social experiences, times of sharing with those who accom-
pany them; the Professionals, who want to link their passions to
what they see in the museum, to satisfy an objective;the Experience
Seekers who see the visit as an essential experience: having been
there and having seen something; and finally the Rechargers, who
see the museum as a refuge and seek to live a restorative, even
spiritual and contemplative experience. We see here, with these
two classifications, that museum visitors can be characterized in

Personalized access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2019) WorkshopUMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus426several ways: as Veron and Levasseur by the way they move around
the museum, as Falk by the search for the motivations of the visits.
In summary, both architectural and ethnographic approaches
allow us to analyze the exploratory behaviour of visitors and the
associated flows. Nevertheless, they struggle to determine precisely
what attracts attention and arouses the interest of visitors. Very
recently, Kuflik [10] proposed a research agenda in which mobile
eye-trackers should be used as offline as well as online educational
aid in art appreciation, since the technology is now mature enough.
Eye-tracking systems have been used in museums since the 2000s.
For example, Wooding et al. [22] installed a fixed and autonomous
eye-tracking device. A visitor sits down, and the eye-tracker is
automatically calibrated. Then the visitor views a succession of
exhibits on the screen in front of him. The AOIs are then highlighted
and studied. More than 5000 subjects participated in this study over
nearly three months. However, this experiment was not in the
natural situation of a museum visit.

At the Indianapolis Museum of Art, a study was conducted to
evaluate the applications of oculometry in museums [20]. The ob-
jective was to know if it was possible to obtain an accurate measure
of the time spent in front of an exhibit and the points of view of
people who stop in front of the work without having to calibrate
the eye-tracker. Due to the characteristics of infra-red emitters, the
area in which the person was to be placed was quite small, and he or
she had to sit down, which makes it difficult to study the ecological
conditions of the visit. The evaluation was therefore conducted for
a single table, and once the data were collected and analyzed, the
authors concluded that their system was not adequate.

Milekic conducted a study in which an eye-tracker is positioned
above an artwork [14]. Once the visitor is positioned in front of
what he calls the viewing station, the viewpoints are detected, and
audio information is delivered based on the elements being viewed.
Mokatren et al. [15] proposed a similar system in which a mobile
eye-tracker identifies objects of interest, and delivers multimedia
content to museum visitors.

The advantages of using an eye-tracker in a museum context
are numerous: it makes it possible to investigate the behaviour of
visitors without any conscious contribution on their part, without
them having to verbalize what they do, or even to access behaviours
that they would not be able to explain, or that they do not even have
conscience to perform. It also provides access to memory, attention
and other cognitive functions of the subjects. With the arrival of
more mature technologies, the uses of eye-trackers in museums
have diversified and is becoming more widespread, thanks to the
reduction in material costs and to its easier and easier handling.
In [2], Cantoni et al. rely on an eye-tracker to enhance the user
experience through a museum guide. Gaze allows users to select
artworks, perform image scrolling, change the size of displayed
pictures, define sensitive areas, and generate static images showing
a summary of what visitors watched. In the same year, Felicio et
al. [7] proposed to integer gaze data in recommender systems. Their
algorithm computes visual perception’s similarities among users to
build a visual perception network of exhibits. Then, this networked
information is provided to recommender system to generate rec-
ommendations. In [12], the authors suggest using eye-trackers for
indoor positioning. Finally, some recent works [1, 19] use the eye-
tracking technology as a reminiscence tool after the visit to explain

the visitors’ decision making process and motivations, or to analyze
their emotions.

Through our user study, we propose a novel way to take advan-
tage of eye-trackers. We aim at inferring visitors’ preferences from
gaze data.

3 HYPOTHESIS
Our hypothesis is the following: "The gaze data differ according to
whether the artwork being viewed is appreciated or not". Visitors
look differently at an artwork they appreciate and an artwork they
do not appreciate. For the definition of appreciation, we mean that
a visitor appreciated an exhibit if he/she likes it, if it appeals to
him/her, if it arouses his/her interest and/or are relevant according
to his/her visit objectives. We assume that visitors not only spend
time looking at artworks they are interested in, and not always
skip or shorten time next to items they do not like. Time spent
next to a painting can be explained in many different ways: trying
to understand the scene depicted on the painting, accompanying
someone who is interested by the painting, being physically or
mentally tired and having a loss of attention... For this reason, we
need to analyze gaze data rather than just measuring time spent
close to each exhibit. From this assumption ensues the following
sub-assumption: "The collected gaze data can infer what visitors
have appreciated". In other words, for a given artwork, by studying
how the subject looked at it, we should be able to predict whether
he/she likes it or not. Thus, gaze data can be classified into two cat-
egories: those associated with appreciated artworks, and the others.
We suppose that the gaze data linked to appreciated artworks share
common characteristics that distinguish them from the works not
appreciated, and vice versa.

4 EXPERIMENT SETUP
4.1 Environment
We did our study at the Nancy Museum of Fine Arts. This museum
includes nearly 400 works exhibited to the public and distributed
in chronological order over 3 floors. The second floor is devoted to
painting from the fourteenth to the sixteenth century, the first floor
to painting from the seventeenth to the eighteenth century, and the
ground floor is dedicated to the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
If the course on the floors is rather linear leaving visitors to pass
from room to room, the ground floor is a much more open space
and offers more freedom to visitors (see Figure 1). For this reason,
we focused our study on the exploration of the ground floor. This
space contains 117 paintings.

4.2 Material
For this experiment, we used the eye-tracker Tobii Pro Glasses 2,
whose sampling frequency is 100 Hz. We recorded the data with the
Tobii Pro Glasses Controller software and analyzed it with the Tobii
Pro Lab software version 1.64.6879 on a computer Dell Precision
7720 running Windows 10.

4.3 Experiment Procedure
First and foremost, the subject signs an informed consent form
that informs him or her of the purpose and conduct of the study,

Personalized access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2019) WorkshopUMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus427part, museums a few times a year, or even once or several times a
month for a third of the subjects. We collected, with the help of the
videos of the scene cameras, for each participant, the duration of
their visit, and the time spent on the ground floor (see Figure 3), i.e.
the duration of the study strictly speaking since we did not analyze
the data collected when the subjects were in the floors. Of the 16
subjects, we only selected 13 visitors who spent time looking at the
artworks on the ground floor.

Figure 1: Ground floor of the Nancy museum of fine arts.

as well as the rights regarding his or her data. A declaration to
the CIL register has been made to ensure that the data comply
with the legal framework. He is then equipped with eye-tracking
glasses, which are calibrated, and instructed to visit the museum as
naturally as possible, as if he was not wearing the glasses. During
the visit, the experimenter has access to the video filmed live by the
eye-tracker’s scene camera, and can thus quickly intervene in case
of a problem. The subject can take as much time as he wants to
visit. When the subject has finished his visit, he is invited to answer
an online questionnaire on his museum visiting habits, preferences,
and feelings about his visit. He also indicates, on a mosaic of the
paintings from the ground floor, which takes the form of an Internet
page, those he has appreciated (see Figure 2). In order not to solicit
visitors too long, we only ask them to express their preferences in
the form of likes (a click on the painting is equivalent to a click on
a like button).

Figure 2: Extract from the mosaic of the paintings from the
ground floor.

4.4 Participants’ Background
A total of 16 subjects participated in the experiment in May 2018: 9
women, 6 men, and one person who did not wish to indicate his/her
gender. The vast majority - 81.3% - were 18 to 24 years old, the
others were between 25 and 34 years old. They visit, for the most

Figure 3: On the left boxplot of the time spent visiting the
whole museum and on the right boxplot for the ground
floor.

As regards their level of knowledge in art, 12.4% of participants
were art students with a strong knowledge, 43.8% had a general
level, and 43.8% considered they had a low level.

5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Before testing our hypothesis, we analyzed the data collected by
the eye-tracker with Tobii Pro Lab software to extract the eye-data
from the 117 paintings - of which we had the photos - on the ground
floor of the museum. To do this, the software splits the part of the
video previously selected into a set of images, then the matching
algorithm detects the points of interest on the snapshot (i.e. the
desired image, in this case the picture of the painting) and compares
with the points of interest of each image in the selection. Point of
interest detection is generally done using the contrasts and shapes
contained in the images. Once the matching is done, the software’s
graphical interface allows you to visualize the points of view that
match, i.e. those that the software has recognized as being in the
snapshot, in other words when the subject looks at the painting.
We had to process the 117 paintings for each participant, one after
the other, which is extremely time-consuming.

We looked at two variables that we considered relevant for data
discrimination, that is to say the distinction between artworks that
the visitor likes and the others: the number of fixation points on the
painting and the time spent looking at the painting. The goal was
to determine if these gaze data differ significantly when a visitor
looks a painting he appreciates. We consider that a painting is
appreciated by our visitor if it was chosen in the mosaic at the end
of the visit. The subjects on average said they enjoyed 11.14 tables
on the ground floor.

5.1 Number of fixation points per painting
Tobii Pro Lab allowed us to retrieve the gaze data for each painting
and each participant, in the form of a csv file containing the pixel
coordinates of the fixation points every 10 ms. We then recovered

Personalized access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2019) WorkshopUMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus428the number of distinct fixation points for a given painting and
visitor, and repeated this operation on all 117 paintings and 13
visitors. We then carried out statistical tests on these data.

We have chosen to carry out statistical tests from two angles:
local tests taking into account the data of only one participant at
a time, in order to determine the relevance of the "fixation point"
variable for a particular participant, and a global test, including the
data of all participants to be able to observe if there is a general trend
to produce more fixation points when we appreciate an artwork:
this would confirm the significance of the difference in the number
of fixation points between artworks that are appreciated and those
that are not, despite the fact that visitors do not necessarily have
the same gaze behaviours.

We started with local tests: we divided the gaze data of each
visitor into two groups: a group containing the number of fixation
points of the paintings that the visitor has seen and appreciated, and
another containing the number of fixation points of the paintings
that the visitor has seen, but of which he did not mention his
appreciation in the mosaic: in both groups, we did not take into
account the paintings that had no fixation points, so were not seen.
The null hypothesis H0 of the statistical test was that there is
no significant difference between the distribution of the data of the
two groups, i.e. the number of fixation points does not allow the
appreciated paintings to be distinguished from the other paintings.
In order to test this hypothesis, we previously used a normality test
on the data groups - 2 groups for each participant, i. e. 26 groups,
and concluded that for all participants, the groups of appreciated
artworks followed a normal distribution, unlike the groups of other
artworks for which only two followed a normal law.

We were then able to test H0. We had two independent samples
- the two groups. For each visitor, if the data - those of the two
groups - followed a normal distribution, we performed a Student
test, parametric, and a Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test.

We observe very mixed results: out of 13 participants, 6 have
a number of fixations that differ significantly when they look at
an artwork they like and one they do not like. For the other 7
participants, this difference is not significant (see Figure 4).

For the global test, we grouped all visitor data into 2 groups:
number of fixation points for artworks seen and appreciated on
the one hand, and number of fixation points for artworks seen
but not mentioned in the mosaic on the other hand. Shapiro’s
normality tests showed that the two groups did not followed a
normal distribution, so we performed a Wilcoxon test and obtained
a p − value = 3.857 ∗ 10−11. There is thus a significant difference
between the data of the two groups. Thus, although the results of
local tests do not provide a reliable answer to the hypothesis, the
global test confirms that the fixation points can be considered as a
variable discriminating in the appreciation of artworks.

5.2 Time spent looking at the paintings
Tobii Pro Lab does not give direct access to the viewing time of
a snapshot, so we retrieved this data by counting the number of
fixation points, including repetitions, and multiplying this number
by 10 (time stamp interval) to obtain times in milliseconds. We then
carried out local tests and a global test on the same principle as
before.

Figure 4: Analysis of the number of fixation points.

For the local tests, 7 participants have a viewing time that differs
significantly when they watch an artwork they appreciate, while
the 6 other participants do not show any difference.

The global test shows a significant difference between the data
of the two groups (Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney, p − value = 4.158 ∗
10−12). Thus, the conclusion is the same as for fixations: the results
of local tests are mixed, and the global test favours the discriminat-
ing power of the viewing time for the appreciation of artworks, a
result that must be confirmed by a larger amount of data.

Figure 5: Analysis of the time spent looking at paintings.

Personalized access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2019) WorkshopUMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus4296 CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
We carried out a pilot study at the Nancy Museum of Fine Arts,
the objective of which was to show that there are correlations
between the number of fixation points and the fact of appreciating
an artwork on the one hand, and between the time spent looking at
an artwork and the fact of appreciating it on the other hand. This
work is a first step towards modelling the preferences of visitors
in a museum based solely on their exploratory and gaze behaviour.
We believe that these are promising results towards recommender
systems adapted to first-time and anonymous visitors, who do not
wish to waste time explicitly communicating their preferences.

Among our perspectives, we want to increase the number of
subjects in our study to 100 visitors. In this way, we will increase
the statistical power of our tests. We will then deepen our statistical
analysis by studying in particular the correlation between the time
spent in front of a painting and the number of fixation points to
check the degree of attention of the subjects. We will also try to
normalize the time spent in front of each painting according to the
longest time spent in front of an exhibit for each subject and for all
our users combined. In addition, we plan to study the discriminating
power of other gaze characteristics such as pupil dilation. The
literature shows that there is a correlation between pupil dilation
and the person’s emotions, especially positive emotions. Finally, in
the short term, we planned to design a classification algorithm for
predicting visitors’ preferences based on their gaze data.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Hori-
zon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agree-
ment No 693150.

We would also like to thank the Nancy Museum of Fine Arts and
the City of Nancy4for allowing us to carry out our study on their
premises. Finally, we would like to thank the Institute of Digital
Sciences, Management and Cognition (IDMC) for its support.

REFERENCES
[1] G. Arbelaez Garces, P. Parra, M. Camargo, S. PeÃśarete, and L. Dupont. Under-
standing museum visitors’ experience through an eye-tracking study and a living
lab approach. In 22nd ICE/IEEE International Technology Management Conference,
Trondhiem, Norway, 2016.

[2] V. Cantoni, L. Merlano, N. Nugrahaningsih, and M. Porta. Eye tracking for cul-
tural heritage: A gaze-controlled system for handless interaction with artworks.
In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Computer Systems and
Technologies 2016, CompSysTech ’16, pages 307–314, 2016.

[3] L. Cohen.

Culture track 2017 report.
content/uploads/2017/02/CT2017-Top-Line-Report.pdf, 2017.

https://culturetrack.com/wp-

[4] O. des publics des ESF.

Le profil des visiteurs individuels des musées
royaux des beaux-arts de belgique synthèse de lâĂŹenquête de 1996/97.
http://www.belspo.be/belspo/pubobs/files/SyntheseannuaireBaugardMRBAB.pdf,
2003.

[5] O.

des

Publics

des
http://www.culture.gouv.fr/Thematiques/Connaissance-des-
patrimoines/Connaissance-des-publics/Publics-et-patrimoines/PatrimoStat,
2016.

Patrimoines.

Patrimostat.

[6] J. H. Falk. An identity-centered approach to understanding museum learning.

Curator: The Museum Journal, 49(2):151–166, 2006.

[7] C. Z. Felício, C. M. M. de Almeida, G. Alves, F. S. F. Pereira, K. V. R. Paixão, and
S. de Amo. Visual perception similarities to improve the quality of user cold start
recommendations. In Advances in Artificial Intelligence, pages 96–101, 2016.
[8] K. Kontiza, O. Loboda, L. Deladiennee, S. Castagnos, and Y. Naudet. A museum
app to trigger users’ reflection. In 2nd Workshop on Mobile Access to Cultural
Heritage, MobileCH 2018, Barcelona, Spain, September 03, 2018, 2018.

[9] J. Krukar. Walk, look, remember: The influence of the gallery’s spatial layout on
human memory for an art exhibition. J. Behavioral Sciences, 4:181–201, 2014.

[10] T. Kuflik. Mobile eye tracking in (cultural heritage) education âĂŞ ideas and
research agenda. In 2nd Workshop on Mobile Access to Cultural Heritage, MobileCH
2018, Barcelona, Spain, September 03, 2018, 2018.

[11] T. Kuflik, Z. Boger, and M. Zancanaro. Analysis and Prediction of Museum Visitors’

Behavioral Pattern Types. 2012.

[12] T. Kuflik, J. Lanir, E. Dim, A. J. Wecker, M. Corrà, M. Zancanaro, and O. Stock.
Indoor positioning: challenges and solutions for indoor cultural heritage sites. In
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, IUI
2011, Palo Alto, CA, USA, February 13-16, 2011, pages 375–378, 2011.

[13] B. M. Information in space is space in information. In Billeder fra det Fjerne/Images

from Afar, pages 161–171. 1996.

[14] S. Milekic. Gaze-tracking and museums: Current research and implications. In

Museum and the Web (MW 2010), Toronto, Canada, 2010.

[15] M. Mokatren, T. Kuflik, and I. Shimshoni. Using eye-tracking for enhancing
the museum visit experience. In International Conference on Advanced Visual
Interfaces, AVI 2016, Bari, Italy, June 07-10, 2016, pages 330–331, 06 2016.
[16] P. Osche, S. Castagnos, and A. Boyer. Antrs: Recommending lists through a
multi-objective ant colony system. In 41st European Conference on Information
Retrieval, ECIR 2019, Cologne, Germany, April 14-18, 2019, 2019.

[17] P. Osche, S. Castagnos, A. Napoli, and Y. Naudet. Walk the line: Toward an
efficient user model for recommendations in museums. In 11th International
Workshop on Semantic and Social Media Adaptation and Personalization, SMAP
2016, Thessaloniki, Greece, October 20-21, 2016, pages 83–88, 2016.

[18] N. C. L. Reed. Understanding visitor happiness in museums. PhD thesis, University

of Washington, 2018.

[19] D. Schmitt and O. Aubert. Remind: a method to understand the micro-dynamics
of the museum visitors experience. Journal of Human Mediated Interactions,
17(1):43–70, 2016.

[20] R. J. Stein and S. Filippini-Fantoni. Evaluating the practical applications of eye
tracking in museums. In Museum and the Web (MW 2012), San Diego, USA, 2012.
[21] E. Verón and M. Levasseur. Ethnographie de l’exposition: l’espace, le corps et le
sens. Centre Georges Pompidou, Bibliothèque publique d’information, 1989.
[22] D. S. Wooding, M. D. Mugglestone, K. J. Purdy, and A. G. Gale. Eye movements of
large populations: Implementation and performance of an autonomous public eye
tracker. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 34(4):509âĂŞ517,
2002.

[23] M. Zancanaro, T. Kuflik, Z. Boger, D. Goren-Bar, and D. Goldwasser. Analyzing
In International Conference on User

museum visitorsâĂŹ behavior patterns.
Modeling (UM2007), pages 238–246, Corfu, Greece, 2007.

4https://www.nancy.fr/

Personalized access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2019) WorkshopUMAP’19 Adjunct, June 9–12, 2019, Larnaca, Cyprus430