Museum Management and Curatorship

ISSN: 0964-7775 (Print) 1872-9185 (Online) Journal homepage: 
https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rmmc20

Informing the Design of Web Interfaces to
Museum Collections

Mary C. Dyson & Kevin Moran

To cite this article: Mary C. Dyson & Kevin Moran (2000) Informing the Design 
of Web
Interfaces to Museum Collections, Museum Management and Curatorship, 18:4, 
391-406, DOI:
10.1080/09647770000501804

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09647770000501804

Published online: 30 Jul 2010.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 513

View related articles

Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rmmc20


Pergamon

Museum Management and Curatorship, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp. 391–406, 2000

© 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

Printed in Great Britain
0260–4779/01 $ - see front matter

PII:S0260-4779(01)00042-X

Informing the Design of Web Interfaces
to Museum Collections

Mary C. Dyson and Kevin Moran

Introduction

Developing attractive and resourceful web applications for museums is taking
place in a fast growing and changing environment. Museums contain rich
sources of material in their collections, and there is particular interest in 
making
this material available to a wide audience (Fahy and Sudbury, 1995). This infor-
mation must be accessible and usable for the public (Donovan, 1997).

The Rural History Centre at the University of Reading is currently working
on a Designation Fund project to make their collections accessible and relevant
to a wide range of public audiences, through the World Wide Web. The project
involves cataloguing items into a database; creating digitised images of objects
and photographs; authoring new text to promote new meanings and uses of
the material; developing web interfaces to the database to meet the needs of
different audiences: school children, general public, and experts; and 
evaluation
of the access systems on samples of the target audiences. This paper focuses
on a preparatory stage of the project which assessed the situation on the web
with regard to access to collections in August 1999, including a review of 
litera-
ture on putting collections online and designing for different user groups and
an evaluation of a small sample of web sites which share some features with
the proposed site. The evaluation below describes the facilities offered by the
sites and analyses their usability and presentation. The research has led to a 
set
of recommendations and proposals based on the results of the evaluation and
relevant literature. The guidance covers the information design of sites of this
nature; how to integrate access to collections into the general site; ways of
dealing with multiple users; the generation of story-based environments; and
how the collections database might be searched and records returned.

Evaluation

The objectives of the evaluation of web sites were to identify other sites which
do something similar to the plans for the Rural History Centre; observe how
the functionality has been implemented; and consider which aspects of the inter-
faces may be adopted or adapted for this project. Sites other than museums were
therefore considered (e.g. libraries, galleries, educational projects, 
photographic
collections) to broaden the range of possible solutions. A sample of seven 
sites


was selected which included those with a searchable database of records, or
those which had attempted to cater for more than one user type. These sites
were:

1. Hampshire Museums (www.hants.gov.uk/museums/catalog.html)

2. The Tate (www.tate.org.uk/home/index.htm)

3. National Gallery of Art, Washington DC (www.nga.gov)

4. SCRAN (www.scran.ac.uk)

5. PhotoDisc (www.photodisc.com)

6. London Transport Museum (www.ltmuseum.co.uk)

7. The Library of Virginia (www.lva.lib.va.us)

General Methodology

Three approaches to evaluation were incorporated into the study, and a two-
tier evaluation tool was created, consisting of a formal and informal level. 
This
created a suitable structure, whilst also enabling additional elements to be 
added
to provide the focus on databases and museums which are important features
of this study. A method developed by Wallace (1995) and subsequently modified
by Love and Feather (1998) for evaluating library special collections on the web
was adapted for use as the formal approach. The less formal method, i.e. more
descriptive, combined the Systematic Usability Evaluation (SUE) of Garzotto,
Matera and Paolini (1998) with a framework proposed by Walker, Reynolds and
Edwards (1999). A key feature of the SUE is that it considers the specific 
nature
of the application to be evaluated, rather than addressing only general 
interface
features. In so doing, such factors as learnability and efficiency are 
considered.
This method takes into account the structure of the information, alongside the
presentation, and allows for discussion and interpretation of sites. From a 
basic
outline, defined by general prompts, criteria were modified to suit the purpose
of the evaluation. The Walker et al. (1999) method was initially developed to
provide criteria for teachers to guide their choice of CD-ROMs for classroom
use. Issues related to learning, access and navigation, typography, use of 
images
and text were included in the current evaluation.

Formal Evaluation

The framework for this evaluation is summarised in Table 1. General aspects of
the whole site are considered (1a), before focusing on access to collections 
(1b).
All of the main dimensions are broken down into further sub-dimensions and
the outcome of the evaluation is a value assigned to each sub-dimension. In
some cases, this will identify whether a feature is present or absent, while in
others, the nature of the feature is described. The questions in the final 
column
provide an interpretation of each of the sub-dimensions. The main dimensions
can be summarised as:

  Institutional information providing general contextual information on the 
site

  Finding aids identifying whether or not the whole site can be searched and
the means of searching


  User information identifying sites which target specific audiences

 Catalogues or collections describing the nature of searches of collections,
where available

  Structural context locating the access to collections within the site

  Search mechanisms describing the methods available to search the collection

  Search return or records identifying the nature of the search outcomes

Results

The outcome of the formal evaluation is shown in Table 2. Some observations
can be made from this summary:

 Only a little over half the sites provide information on accessing and copying
the collection.

 In contrast, most of the sites allow users to submit feedback, and email 
queries
are encouraged in relation to collections.

  Only two of the sites cater specifically for different user groups (SCRAN and
London Transport Museum).

  Most of the sites provide access to the collections database (this was the 
main
criterion for inclusion in the sample). Access is generally through searches
using keywords or phrases. The sites vary as to whether the search can be

Table 1. Framework for formal evaluation

Dimension    Sub-dimension    Value          Meaning

(a) Generals aspects of site

Institutional    mission       y/n         Is there a mission statement
information    statement               available?

acquisition    y/n        Is there an acquisition policy

policy                available?

access       y/n enquiries   Is there information on
information              accessing the collection or a

contact telephone number?
copying      y/n / n/a      Is there information on copying
information              the special collection?

general contact  y/n      Is there information on contact
by post, telephone, facsimile, e-
mail?

location      y/n maps     Are maps or directions
information             provided?

Finding aids    availability     y/n        Can the site be searched?

type      keyword/phrase Does the search use keywords
index      or phrases, or is there an

index?

User information user feedback   y/n         Does the site provide a way of

submitting user information or
feedback?

target audience  y/n        Does the site target particular
audiences?

(continued)


Table 1. (Continued)

Dimension    Sub-dimension    Value          Meaning

(b) Features of the catalogues or collections

Catalogues or   availability     available/linked  Are on-line finding aids on 
or
collections                         available via this site?

type        static       Are the finding aids a static list
list/database    or a searchable database?

list classification  category     If there is a static list, which

fields of database are used for
list?

query     e-mail/form n/a  Can you submit a query
through the site by e-mail or
form?

Structural     position within  number      How many links have to be
context      site                  followed from the home page

before getting to collections
page?

links to external y/n        Are links to other collection

collections              databases given?

currency     date        When was this collection last
updated?

Search       interface type   keyword/phrase  Do you search by entering a
mechanisms              menu       keyword, a phrase? Can search

be delimited by menu choice?
user type    novice/     Do different search mechanisms

intermediate/   get aimed at different levels of
expert      user experience?

Search return or  format       records/lists    Does a successful search give
records                           you individual records to step

through or lists of records to
choose from?

failed search   description n/a  What process occurs if your

search fails?

type      text/images/   What kind of media are
video/sound   contained in the collection for

viewing?

quality      low/high     Is material available in low or

high resolution?

amount      number      How many records are held in

the collection?

narrowed down, by choosing specific categories. An alternative approach is
also used, which limits selection to a pre-defined set of alternatives (static
list). These are presented in various different types of menus. The Tate uses
only static lists.

  The majority of sites return search results as lists of records.

  One site uses a story-based approach (tours) to introduce items within collec-
tions (NGA, Washington).


Discussion

What can be seen from this formal evaluation are consistent approaches and
types of information made available by the sites in very different domains and
circumstances. There are few radical or innovative mechanisms to provide con-
tent   and often the database is only used to return records from searches and
does not appear to be integrated with the remainder of the site. The sites 
differ
as to whether any word or phrase can be used as a search term, or the search
is limited to specific fields (e.g. artist, subject), or specific items within 
fields.
Whilst these limitations can support searching, by prompting the user as to the
range of material covered in the collection, some material will not be 
accessible
to users if the lists are not exhaustive, or are not dynamically updated from
the database.

Informal Evaluation

Table 3 describes the framework for this evaluation with brief definitions of
terms. Table 3a and 3b adopt the usability attributes of Garzotto et al. (1998)
with learnability broken down into consistency and predictability. Efficiency is
described in terms of accessibility and orientation. Evaluation of the 
presentation
of sites (Table 3c) adapts dimensions from Walker et al. (1999) considering
consistency, typography, images and text, and finally overall presentation. This
analysis is a variation on the method of heuristic evaluation¹, which involves
a systematic inspection of an interface. The heuristics are defined within the
framework. This procedure is normally part of an iterative design process, and
has been shown to be more successful with multiple evaluators. However, since
the purpose of this evaluation was to identify strengths and weaknesses of 
exist-
ing sites to inform future designs, a single evaluator who was experienced in
web design was considered appropriate.

Results

As this type of evaluation provides detailed descriptions within each dimension,
the results of evaluating only one site—the National Gallery of Art in 
Washington
DC—are described in detail. The outcomes of the evaluations of all sites are
summarised in the form of recommendations in the next section.

National Gallery of Art

 Learnability: consistency

The structure of the pages and different groups of pages is generally 
consistent,
but links to sections sometimes come before and sometimes after the main text.
A key problem with the links is the use of two graphic treatments: links can be
from ‘live text’ (i.e. words within the body of text used as a link) or gif 
images.
A further problem is the lack of distinction between links which take you to a
new page, off the site, and those which go to a position on the same page.

 Learnability: predictability

The order of items is coherent and this is most clearly illustrated on the page
about the collection. A preliminary list of topics is given e.g. painting, 
sculpture,


Table 2. Outcome of formal evaluation

Dimension     Sub-dimension                           Web sites

Hampshire    Tate     National    SCRAN   PhotoDisc   London   Library of

Gallery of              Transport   Virginia
Art

(a) Global aspects of site (e  e-mail, f  fax, t  telephone, p  postal address)

Institutional   mission statement    N        N        N        Y        Y      
  N        N
information

acquisition policy    N        N        N        N        N        Y        N
access information   n/a       Y        Y        N        n/a       Y        Y
copying information  n/a       Y        Y        N        Y        n/a       Y
general contact     Y: e,t      Y        Y        Y: p,t,f,e    Y: p,t,f     Y: 
p,t,e    Y: p,t,e
location information  n/a       Y: maps    Y: maps    Y        n/a       Y      
  Y

Finding aids   available         Y        Y        Y        N        N        N 
       Y

type           keyword/   site       keyword/   n/a       n/a       n/a       
keyword
phrase     map/guide   concept

User       user feedback      Y: e, form   Y: e, form   Y       n/a       Y     
  Y       Y
information


(b) Collection

target audience     N        N        N        Y: education  N        Y: 
schools,   N

corporate
business

Catalogues or  availability        Y        Y        Y        Y        Y        
N        Y
collections

type          database,   static lists   database,   database,   database    
n/a      database
static lists          tours, static  static lists

lists

list classification     subject     artists     artists     curricula    n/a    
   n/a       n/a
query          t,e       e        Y        Y        Y: e      Y: e      Y: e


Dimension     Sub-dimension                           Web sites

Hampshire    Tate     National    SCRAN   PhotoDisc   London   Library of

Gallery of              Transport   Virginia
Art

Structural     position within site   2 or 3     1        1        1        1   
     1        1

context

links to external    N        N       N       Y        Y        Y        Y
collections

currency        13 August   n/a       n/a       n/a       n/a       n/a       
n/a
1999

Search      interface type      enter      hierarchical  enter      enter      
enter      n/a       enter
mechanisms                keyword or  menus     keyword    keyword    keyword   
         keyword

phrase, menu         menus (static prompts of  menu to           menu to

(static list)           lists and to  fields,     delimit            delimit

delimit     hierarchical  search             search
search)    menus in

static lists

user type        n/a       n/a       n/a       N        N        n/a       n/a
Search return   format          list of records list of records list of     
list of records thumnbails of n/a       lists of
or records                                 records,            images           
  records

biography

failed search      blank screen  n/a       try again    ‘no entries   search 
screen n/a       ‘no records

found’                    found’

type           text      text, image  text, image  text, image,  images     n/a 
      text, images

video, sounds

quality          n/a       low      low & high  high & low  low, med,   n/a     
  low

high

amount         n/a       8000     100,000    n/a       n/a       n/a       n/a


Table 3. Framework for informal evaluation

Dimension          Question              Prompts

(a) Learnability

Consistency      Are conceptually similar   Symmetry between parts—Is a
elements treated in a     picture associated with a record
similar fashion?        treated in the same manner as

another picture associated with
another record?

Are the navigational links of
sections within a group of pages
treated in a similar manner?

Predictability     Can the user form a     Regularity—Are similar pages
predictive model of how   structured the same way? Are

the content is organised   sections structured the same way?
and how the system

behaves?

Collection ordering coherency—If
there is a list of linked items, does
the order within the list
correspond to the logical order
within  the site?

(b) Efficiency

Accessibility     How easy is it for users   Completeness—Does the overview
to find information they   of site content (e.g. on home page)
are looking for?       contain all information?

Navigational richness—Are there
too many or too few links? Do they
make sense? Is their meaning
obvious?

Orientation      Can users identify their    Backtracking—Does the user need
current location and     to use the browser’s back button
predict the consequences   to access a previous page or are
of their movements?     there ways built in to the

application? If there are ways built
in to the application, do they use
abstracted language like ‘back’ and
‘next’ or are they context sensitive?
Context observability—Are there
verbal or graphic cues to tell users
where they are in the application,

e.g. in a sequence of pages ‘1/5’ or
‘intro > contact >
telephonenumber’?

(continued)

decorative arts and so on. Clicking on painting takes the user down the page
to the section on painting, which is then followed by sculpture. This 
consistency
between the list and order of the sections is helpful in orienting the user.

 Efficiency: accessibility

A positive aspect of this site is the accessibility of the site map from every
screen. Although more like an index than a map, this lists the sections and 
sub-


Table 3. (Continued)

Dimension          Question              Prompts

(c) Presentation

Consistency      Is the presentation of    Are things like colour, type,
members within a      information similar within a
collection consistent?     collection while sufficiently distinct

from other objects at the same
level?

Does the area of the
screen used remain
consistent throughout the
application?

Typography      Does the typography help  Are the headings clearly

users to find the       differentiated from the text? Are
information they are     chunks of text at different levels
looking for?          clearly differentiated from each

other?

Does the text look    Is there plenty of white space
accessible and inviting?   around the text and between the

paragraphs?

Is the text clearly legible?  Is the typeface legible, and is the

type large enough? Are the lines
short enough to be easily read?

Images and text   Is the relationship

between pictures and
text made clear?

Are the pictures large    Can the pictures be enlarged?
enough to be clearly

visible?

Overall      Is the overall presentation
attractive and engaging?

sections of the site. The list order maintains the structure and hierarchy of 
the
site, rather than choosing to list alphabetically, which can lead to confusion.
The facility to search the site is also always present. However, on accessing 
the
search page, the option to search the collection appears before the option to
search the site, which could confuse users who may not see the site search.

There are plenty of links always available to the user and most of them clearly
inform the user of their purpose. Furthermore, the links are well organised and
structured so as not to be the dominant element on screen. There is a disparity,
however, between the colouring of links in the left hand navigation bar and
how the linked element is displayed. Brown is used to identify links to 
functions
of the overall site and green is used for sections within the site, but this 
colour
scheme is not continued in the display of the sections, which would have made
the distinction clearer.

 Efficiency: orientation

Often the browser back button must be used to make small navigation steps
within a section. However, the user is able to jump to the top of main sections
and sub-sections using the links within the site. Some of the lists and content


is split over numerous pages with links within the application labelled “next”
and “back”. Other information offered on these pages includes the total number
of elements e.g. 430 and then the set of records currently shown e.g. 20-29 of 
430.

 Presentation: consistency

The same typeface is used throughout for all live text, but this is different 
from
the typeface used in text converted to images. Also there are few indications
of separate sections (e.g. headings), so changes of structure or content can be
easily missed. A positive aspect is that the screen does not need to be re-sized
from the home page when browsing the site.

 Presentation: typographic

Headings are clearly marked by different sizes, weights and space. The body
text remains the same typeface, size and weight throughout.

There is good space used around text and images, although there can be a
conglomerating effect around the right hand edge of the navigation area and
the left hand edge of the main content area as shown in Figure 1.

The typeface is clearly legible, but if the browser window is set too wide,
the text is displayed in a long line length which can prove problematic when
reading a lot of prose.

 Images and text

Images for information purposes are clearly labelled with dimensions, creators,
dates, etc., and are positioned close to the relating text. Such informational
images can often be enlarged and the same information is then displayed to
accompany the image.

 Overall

The presentation has consistent features, but there are anomalies. Colour is 
lim-
ited to brown, green and black throughout which provides no aids to structure
the site. The textured background can also affect the ease of reading in some 
cir-
cumstances.

Recommendations

In summarising the informal evaluations, good and bad practice can be ident-
ified, leading to a set of recommendations:

 It is important to ensure that links within sites can be easily identified. 
Various
sites use both live text (i.e. words or phrases within a paragraph) and gif
images (often in a sidebar) to indicate links. This division is appropriate if 
the
two types of links are conceptually different. The different graphic treatments
will thereby indicate the difference in nature between the links. However, if
all links have a similar function, they should also be displayed in a similar 
man-
ner.

  Conversely, the sites make no distinction between links to other sites, links
to another page within the site, and links to another point on the same page.
This inconsistency may be deliberate, but does not aid the user’s orientation.
This can be a particular problem when leaving a site. With a site such as the
Tate, which currently encompasses three locations, it is important to be able
to identify whether a link remains within a specific location, or refers to the
main site. This differentiation can be achieved through graphic treatment, e.g.
use of colour or location on the page.


1. The conglomerating effect around the vertical line in the National Gallery 
of Art
(Washington) site.

  The use of colour to indicate different sections of sites is helpful, but 
these
need to be carried through from links to sections. Similarly, whilst there is
consistency within certain elements of sites, the examples illustrate that this
is    not always followed through to the whole site.

  A site map or index is a useful feature, particularly if it accurately 
reflects the
structure of the site. An alphabetical ordering of items may be a useful list to
scan, but it does not provide a mental model of the site. These features should
also be accessible from most places within the site, and not just the home
page.

  Headings should be clearly differentiated, which was the case in all sites
except one (London Transport Museum). Good use is made of space to group
similar items and separate these from other elements. Re-sizing of pages to
cater for different content is unfortunate, but may be unavoidable. To ensure


that extremely long lines are avoided, some control of line length independent
of the browser window width is advisable.

  It is important to make a distinction between functional or informative images
and decorative images, particularly when collections include images. This has
generally been achieved in these examples by structuring the results of
searches and including captions with images. Where an image can be manipu-
lated, e.g. enlarged, this should be made clear.

  A consistent and functional design is recommended, whilst also ensuring that
interaction with the site is engaging. Thoughtful use of colour and space can
clarify the organisation of the site and improve the presentation.

Proposals

These proposals are formulated from the evaluations of sample sites, supported
by the views of other authors expressed in the literature, and incorporate the
authors’ knowledge of interface design.

General Site

  Integrate the collections database transparently into the make-up of the site,
so that being able to search it is just another capability of the overall site.
This integration is recommended by Besser (1997) who suggests that a key
consideration in the overall plan for developing museums’ on-line content
should be bringing together collection management systems and exhibition
information into one system. A similar approach to this is the integration of
all the parts of the museum to provide a rich resource in the shape of a
‘knowledge system’ (Blackaby, 1997).

 Information to make available to all users:

- details of the user categories

- how to organise a trip to the museum, including maps, etc.

- contact details

- site map

- mission statement

- acquisition policy

- links to other sites of possible interest

Some of these features, e.g. site map, links to other sites, may benefit from 
being
tailored to the category of user.

 If a user has a query do not just provide the phone, fax, e-mail, also provide
an on-line form. This has the advantage that queries are received in a standard
structure and there is a record of query types. These could be used to identify
patterns. If, for example, there are frequent queries concerning a particular
category of objects, this may be a candidate for a story (see below).

  Move toward a site which is dynamically generated as much as possible using
scripts and databases so there is little manual HTML work involved (see, for
example, searching the database, below).


Multiple Users

  Allow users to choose their category (e.g. general public or expert) which
may determine what is presented and the form of presentation. The same
information tailored to different user types can have many benefits. However,
it is not necessary to be restricted to the same content across user type. Some
users may be allowed access to additional distinct content which the other
user groups do not. This is shown in the web site for the Marble Museum at
Carrara in Italy², discussed by Paterno and Mancini (1999), with information
included in the tours of the collection which other user groups do not get.

  Another approach to handling multiple users, described in the literature, is a
multimodal style of interaction (Garzotto, Mainetti and Paolini, 1997). Modes
are defined as different types of communications (e.g. text, sound; concise
or extensive writing style) and interactions (e.g. navigation versus query).
These authors suggest that the same set of commands or options can be avail-
able in each mode combination, but that their effects will vary according to
specific modes. With different types of users, the presentation of the content
can be modified accordingly, but the same functions can be available to each
type of user.

  Choose between alternative methods of adapting to users

identical options, but different responses depending on category of user (as
above)

different range of options

The advantage of the first alternative is that one type of content can be re-
worked to suit different user types. An example of this approach is also found
at the Marble Museum web site². However, the second alternative avoids con-
fusing the user if they explore more than one category, since the difference
in meaning when choosing the same option could be disorienting.

  Track the user and respond with context sensitive information across the site.
Paterno and Mancini (1999) focus on the implementation of a system to
handle different user types and discuss ‘adaptivity’. An adaptive system auto-
matically adjusts what is presented to the user as a result of the user’s 
actions.

  Although distinct user categories can be identified (in this project, school
children, general public and experts), certain features are generally useful.
For example, interactivity and two-way dialogues are recommended for all
users. The benefits of interaction can be seen from the Natural History
Museum’s QUEST web site³ where users can have dialogue via a message
board.

  The distinctions between groups can also be made more subtle. For example,
expert material could be embedded into the general public model and only
shown when requested.

  For schoolchildren the material should reflect the national curriculum’s aims
and goals.

  Teacher support should be provided on-line, such as worksheets, lesson plans,
guides and the like which the teacher downloads. An example of school
material is the Odyssey site in Atlanta⁴.


Access Methods

Stories

  Story-based environments can be generated for all user types, pulling infor-
mation from the database. Blackaby (1997) has emphasised the importance
of realising the relationships between objects accessed by users in order to
integrate them with one another and the supporting material which contex-
tualises them. The stories may begin by being generated ‘by hand’ as static
pages, but the database could be used at any time to pull further information
on objects or areas of interest. The database can be used to create dynamic
stories where the ‘who, where, why and how’ is important to the user, rather
than obtaining information on an isolated object record (Donovan, 1997; Free-
man, 1999). People can learn from contextual information, provided in the
form of engaging stories. Objects can be woven into stories, rather than hav-
ing a focus on the objects (Donovan, 1997).

  Obtaining information from the database should be done without the user
having to ‘search the database’ but just by clicking on a link which passes
parameters to a script which does the searching. Any returned results should
not replace the current information as the user may decide the further infor-
mation is not useful. This could be achieved by introducing a new sub-win-
dow or using space set aside in a frame.

  For creating story environments it may be useful to develop an application
where text can be entered and images referenced from the database. Using
this application, pages could be generated ready to be embedded in the site.

Searching the Database (expert Users)

 When searching the database, rather than providing a blank screen or prompt,
give the user choices via pull-down menus, check boxes or radio buttons.
The option to search using keywords and phrases could also be given. A
common misconception within the museum world is that providing access
is enough either by letting users trawl through lists of records or by 
presenting
them with a blank search engine (Donovan, 1997).

  Attention must be paid to the choices provided as when searching a museum
database it is clear that “often what they [users] want to know and we’ve
[museums] prepared for them are two different things” (Blackaby, 1997). The
lists available to users to choose from need to be dependent on the fields
within the database. So if there is a field such as ‘vehicle’, applicable to 
certain
records, then that would be a choice on the list. If a user chooses vehicles,
then a second list should be updated to reflect this choice. This would be
presented as a list of the range of vehicles currently in the database. If the
user then chose car, a further list should be updated to reflect this choice,
gradually narrowing the search. The extent to which the search is refined
could be determined by the user or the museum. By showing the user what
is available from the database, there is a higher chance of successfully
returning a desired record. This approach is a combination of static lists and
database searches.

  Pull down menus (or other forms of lists) should (ideally) be dynamically


created or updated from the database. Thereby, if new categories are created,
or new instances within categories, these are automatically generated
within menus.

  If the user chooses to search by keyword, some instruction should be given
not only on how to formulate the correct syntax for the search, but also some
clues as to which words are likely to be successful.

Returning Records

  If a search fails, the user should benefit from some feedback which clearly
states this. The feedback should explain why the search has failed i.e. nothing
entered, a mis-spelling, no matching records. Also the search facility should
appear on the same screen so that the users can try again while their failed
search criteria should be displayed.

 A useful feature would be to keep the list of objects visible while viewing
a record.

  When the user chooses to view an object record, related material should be
highlighted with links which would open in new web-windows. This facility
would invite users to explore related items in the collections database.

Conclusions

This work has served as a vehicle to conceptualise the development of the web
interfaces to the collections database at the Rural History Centre. The team 
cur-
rently working on the project is multidisciplinary, which appears to be a neces-
sary condition for projects of this nature. This project in particular requires
subject knowledge of the collections, cataloguing skills, information and inter-
face design skills, an appreciation of educational objectives, and technical web
development skills, amongst others. The report on this preparatory research has
been useful in contributing to the processes of induction of team members to
the project.

It is hoped that the recommendations and proposals reported in this paper
may also prove useful in suggesting directions for similar projects, with the
objective of improving the design of web interfaces. However, in a broader
context, the evaluation methods developed for this project provide a set of 
tools
for analytical evaluation, that can be adapted to suit the particular needs of
a project.

Acknowledgements

This work was funded through the Museums and Galleries Commission with a
Designation Challenge Fund grant awarded to Roy Brigden in the Rural History
Centre at the University of Reading. This fund supported the employment of
the second author for the duration of the preparatory project.


Footnotes

1. Jakob Nielsen ‘Heuristic evaluation’  http://www.useit.com/papers/heuristic/ 
>

2. http://giove.cnuce.cnr.it/

3. http://www.nhm.ac.uk/education/quest2/english/

4. http://www.cc.emory.edu/CARLOS/ODYSSEY/index.html

Bibliography

Besser, H. (1997) Integrating collections management information into on-line 
exhibits: the web as
a facilitator for linking two separate processes. In Museums and the web ’97: 
selected papers,
eds. D. Bearman and J. Trant, pp. 201–205. Archives and Museum Informatics, 
Pittsburgh.

Blackaby, J. (1997) Building integrated museum information retrieval systems: 
practical approaches
to data organisation and access. In Museums and the web ’97: selected papers, 
eds. D. Bearman
and J. Trant, pp. 207–233. Archives and Museum Informatics, Pittsburgh.

Donovan, K. (1997) The best of intentions: public access, the web and the 
evolution of museum
automation. In Museums and the web ’97: selected papers, eds. D. Bearman and J. 
Trant, pp.
128–133. Archives and Museum Informatics, Pittsburgh.

Fahy, A. and Sudbury, W. (1995) Information the hidden resource. Museums and 
the Internet.
Proceedings of the seventh international conference of the MDA. MDA, Cambridge.

Freeman, M. (1999) The great public access debate. MODES Plus News, 13, 1–3.

Garzotto, F., Mainetti, L. and Paolini, P. (1997) Designing modal hypermedia 
applications. In ACM
Conference on Hypertext 1997. ACM Press, New York, 38–47.

Garzotto, F., Matera, M. and Paolini, P. (1998) To use or not to use? 
Evaluating museum web sites. In
Proc Museums and the web 1998, eds. J. Trant and D. Bearman. CD-ROM, Archives 
and Museum
Informatics, Pittsburgh.

Love, C. and Feather, J. (1998) Special collections on the world wide web: a 
survey and evaluation.

Journal of Librarianship and Information Science, 30(4), 215–222.

Paterno, F. and Mancini, C. (1999) Designing web user interfaces adaptable to 
different types of
use. Museums and the web 1999. Archives and Museum Informatics, Pittsburgh.  
http://www.archimuse.com/mw99/papers/paterno/paterno.html >

Walker, S., Reynolds, L. and Edwards, V. (1999) Interactive multimedia in 
primary schools: chil-
dren’s use and understanding of information texts on CD-ROM, and implications 
for teachers
and designers. British Library Research and Innovation Centre, London.

Wallace, D. (1995) Archival repositories on the world wide web: a preliminary 
survey and analysis.

Archive and Museum Informatics, 9(2), 150–175.

