See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/315953193

Outreach and Engagement in a Science Museum

Article  in  Anthropology News · June 2016

DOI: 10.1111/AN.28

CITATIONS
0

7 authors, including:

Leslie C. Moore

The Ohio State University

37 PUBLICATIONS   587 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

Shari Speer

The Ohio State University

69 PUBLICATIONS   1,869 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

READS
98

Laura Wagner

The Ohio State University

88 PUBLICATIONS   1,071 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

Elizabeth A. Mccullough

University of Washington Seattle

20 PUBLICATIONS   162 CITATIONS   

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Expanding Repertoires of Practice: Improving Informal Science Learning for Preschool Dual Language Learners View project

Sociolinguistic perception in real time View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Kiwako Ito on 17 September 2018.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

Linguistics in a Science Museum: Integrating Research,
Teaching, and Outreach at the Language Sciences Research
Lab

Laura Wagner1*, Shari R. Speer1, Leslie C. Moore1,2, Elizabeth A. McCullough1,
Kiwako Ito1, Cynthia G. Clopper1 and Kathryn Campbell-Kibler1
1The Ohio State University
2Utrecht University

Abstract
We describe the mission and practices of the Language Sciences Research Lab, a fully functional research
lab embedded within a science museum. Within this environment, we integrate cutting-edge research,
formal instruction, informal learning, and outreach to the public so that our work in each domain inter-
acts with and enriches the others. We are guided by core concepts from the field of informal science ed-
ucation, and we strive to inspire excitement and expand both scholarly and public knowledge about the
language sciences.

1. Introduction

In recent years, linguists have developed a range of ways to successfully integrate research, teach-
ing, and outreach activities, motivated in part by a principle clearly articulated by Wolfram
(2011:111): ‘If linguists firmly believe that understanding the nature of language is central to un-
derstanding human cognition and behavior, then we owe it to the profession to have more of a
presence in public life.’ Research and teaching have been integrated in efforts to meaningfully
involve students in research as participants (Wanjema et al. 2013) or as contributing researchers
to long-term projects (Labov & Rosenfelder 2011; Maclagan & Gordon 1999). Teaching and
outreach have been integrated in university service-learning courses (Fitzgerald 2010) and in var-
ious paths forged by linguists to reach middle and high school students. This work has introduced
students to scientific perspectives on language diversity and to a discipline that is often undiscov-
ered before undergraduate or even graduate education (Bucholtz et al. 2014; Clark & Trousdale
2012; Culicover & Hume 2013; Denham & Lobeck 2014; Estival et al. 2014; Honda & O’Neil
1993; Lidz & Kronrod 2014; Reaser & Adger 2007; Stewart & Kuhlemann Cárdenez, 2010;
Wolfram, Reaser & Vaughn 2008). Sociolinguists have long recognized the need to give back
to the communities in which they collect data (Labov, 1982; Rickford 1997, 2000; Wolfram
1993; Wolfram et al., 2008), and efforts in that subfield have often focused on fostering public
understanding of and respect for historically stigmatized language varieties. In some subfields,
however, linguistics outreach to the general public is not yet well developed (Purnell et al. 2013).
We have found that an exciting and effective way to engage with the public is through in-
formal science education inside a science museum. Whereas language is often contrasted with
science in formal education settings (e.g., the ‘language arts’ versus science and math), informal
science institutions are spaces in which people are primed to learn about the scientific study of
language. As linguists are well aware, a great deal of our understanding of how language works

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Linguistics in a Science Museum 421

rests on investigations using traditional scientific methods. Given that non-specialists often make
decisions about how to distribute funding across disciplines, public understanding of linguistics as
a science is increasingly important. The Language Sciences Research Lab opened in 2012 within
the Center of Science and Industry (COSI) in Columbus, Ohio, with the mission to conduct
cutting-edge research to excite the public about science while expanding our knowledge about
language. We have developed a repertoire of practices grounded in informal science learning
research in which research, teaching, and outreach are integrated to accomplish these goals.

2. The Language Sciences Research Lab: A University-Museum Partnership
The Language Sciences Research Lab, also known as the ‘Language Pod’, is housed within
COSI’s Labs in Life, a research-in-real-time exhibit that consists of three glass-enclosed rooms
(affectionately known as ‘pods’) inside which research is conducted within the public’s view (see
Figure 1). The entire space was created and is maintained through a partnership between COSI
and the Ohio State University (OSU), and both organizations provide funding and other ma-
terial support for the space. Funding for the Language Pod’s internal operations (equipment,
supplies, and part time staff ) comes from a variety of sources (see Acknowledgements), includ-
ing the National Science Foundation. Any Ohio State faculty member who conducts language
research (broadly construed) is eligible to use Language Pod resources for data collection in ex-
change for their intellectual and service contributions to the Pod’s mission, such as developing
an outreach activity or an educational opportunity for students. This ‘sweat equity’ is the only
contribution required, ensuring that faculty members from a wide range of fields related to lan-
guage sciences have the opportunity to conduct research and engage in associated teaching and
outreach activities in the Pod.

The university-museum partnership that makes the Language Pod possible is not unique.
The Labs in Life exhibit ref lects a recent trend of museums making space for research that does
not necessarily have a close topical connection with other museum exhibits or programs. The

Fig. 1. The Language Sciences Research Lab, or Language Pod, in the Center of Science and Industry.

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

422 Laura Wagner et. al

Living Laboratory project (http://www.livinglab.org) developed at the Museum of Science in
Boston is the most developed and widely known model exemplifying this trend in the United
States. For additional information about building relationships with museums for research and
outreach, we recommend recent articles by Callanan (2012) and Sacco et al. (2014), as well as
Alpert’s (2013) guide for university-based researchers and science museum professionals.
Callanan (2012) describes different ways to do research in museums, different kinds of
researcher-museum relationships, and what museums may get out of allowing research to be
conducted in their spaces. She also provides advice for scholars who want to take their research
to a museum setting. Sacco et al. (2014) provide an overview of informal science education,
followed by several specific examples of scientists who are engaged in the practice, and sugges-
tions for how to get involved. Alpert (2013) provides information and guidance on how univer-
sity researchers can identify potential science museum partners, build and maintain healthy and
productive relationships with them, and collaborate with them on grant proposals.

3. Linguistics and Informal Science

The location of the Language Pod in a science museum has inspired us to draw on informal sci-
ence learning research in the development of our teaching and outreach activities. Language is a
phenomenon with which everyone has direct and extensive experience, making linguistics well
suited to a core goal of informal science education: to help people discover how scientific
knowledge relates to everyday experiences and familiar phenomena. We have found that many
linguistic research topics, such as language acquisition, sociolinguistic perception, and spoken
and written sentence processing, can be leveraged to stimulate more general interest in scientific
research among science museum visitors. Visitors to the Language Pod often share with us their
questions and concerns about their children’s language development, their experience in detect-
ing other people’s accents, and their interest in how we communicate with each other using
particular speech styles. Thus, the Language Pod research and outreach activities are opportuni-
ties to communicate with visitors about how linguistics research contributes to our understand-
ing of and ability to address issues that matter to them.

More formally, we have used the National Research Council (Bell et al. 2009) framework for
understanding, promoting, and assessing science learning in settings such as COSI. The frame-
work identifies six interrelated aspects of informal science learning, which are used to develop
and design learning goals and outcomes for participants in informal science environments. Our
summary of these strands is provided in (1).

(1)

(1) Sparking interest and excitement.
(2) Understanding scientiﬁc content and knowledge.
(3) Engaging in scientiﬁc reasoning.
(4) Reﬂecting on science.
(5) Using the tools and the language of science.
(6) Identifying with the scientiﬁc enterprise.

The Language Pod’s direct engagement of visitors with research studies helps us touch on
several of these strands of informal science learning at once: being a research participant sparks
interest (1), shows visitors how we reason scientifically (3) and the tools we use to investigate
science (5), expands on content knowledge through the debriefing process (2), and often leads
visitors to identify with the scientific enterprise (6) and ref lect on how we use it to investigate
language (4). Our educational activities conducted on the museum f loor tend to focus on a

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

Linguistics in a Science Museum 423

specific language phenomenon (see Section 6) and typically serve to get visitors excited about
language (1), develop their content knowledge (2), and to a limited extent, help them engage
in scientific reasoning (3).

In addition, language as an object of study lends itself well to four of the primary strategies
used to promote learning in informal science institutions such as COSI: juxtaposition, multiple
modes, interactivity, and social interaction (Bell et al. 2009; Fenichel & Schweingruber 2010).
Everyone has beliefs about how language works, and these beliefs provide linguists with ample
opportunities to juxtapose museum visitors’ understanding of linguistic phenomena with the
formal disciplinary ideas that explain them. Further, language is naturally multimodal, involving
both auditory and visual information, which provides different ways for museum visitors to
engage with linguistic concepts, practices, and phenomena. Finally, interaction between people
is the natural environment of language, which means that linguists have no trouble providing
visitors with diverse opportunities to interact with each other at the same time as they interact
with linguistic phenomena and the instruments linguists use to study them.

Finally, linguists are well placed to support science museums in helping the public to better
understand diversity, given the long traditions in the field of explicitly studying linguistic diver-
sity and conducting outreach in this domain (Labov 1982; Rickford 2000; Wolfram 1993; Wol-
fram et al. 2008). Science museums are concerned with diversity, primarily in terms of
broadening participation in informal science education and in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) (Bell et al. 2009; Fenichel & Schweingruber 2010). Linguistics out-
reach in science museums can help visitors rethink issues of language diversity, using scientific
concepts, principles, and practices to create distance from their existing beliefs and attitudes and
thereby help them see linguistic variation in a new light. Linguistics outreach can play a similar
role for science museum staff, exhibit designers, and program developers. In addition, research
conducted by linguists in the museum setting can help science museums better understand and
better serve their diverse audiences. For example, one of the authors (Moore) has recently be-
gun research on the informal science learning experiences of dual language learners, in collab-
oration with partners at COSI and eight other museums. This project is supported by an NSF
Advancing Informal STEM Learning Pathways grant.

4. The Integration of Research, Teaching, and Outreach

4.1. INTEGRATING RESEARCH AND OUTREACH

At universities, it is common practice to have subject pools that encourage undergraduate stu-
dents to actively participate in research. First-hand experience with scientific research through
participation in an experiment offers an in-depth view of the research process and the concrete
conditions under which linguistic data are created. The Language Pod applies this practice in the
science museum setting and thereby facilitates our research and expands our engagement with
the general public. Researchers in the lab offer visitors opportunities to serve as participants in
ongoing research, to observe research in real time, and to discuss research with the scientists
who are conducting the work.

To encourage visitor participation, experiments conducted in the Language Pod are designed
to be short (usually under 20 minutes long) and interesting to the general public. Debriefing ex-
planations are constructed to be informative for a diverse population of museum visitors that in-
cludes adults with advanced degrees, adults with no college education, and young children.
These debriefings involve a verbal description of the research goals and predictions, an invitation
to ask questions or engage with the researcher more deeply about the research, and a printed
brochure with more information about the topic of the research, including the researcher’s

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

424 Laura Wagner et. al

contact information and URLs to online resources with additional relevant information. Re-
searchers in the Language Pod therefore gain valuable experience discussing their work with di-
verse, non-academic audiences.

In addition to active participation in research through experiments, COSI visitors can observe
ongoing lab activities and thereby enhance their understanding of the process of scientific re-
search. The appeal of ‘watching research in real time’ is regarded by COSI as one of our central
contributions to their informal science environment. The research conducted in the lab gives us
the opportunity to share with both research participants and casual viewers a visceral sense of the
day-to-day workings of a research lab, as well as an idea of what questions are currently captur-
ing researchers’ attention in the field of language science.

4.2. INTEGRATING TEACHING AND OUTREACH

The Language Pod has also developed a university-level course aimed at both undergraduate
and graduate students called ‘Training in Informal Science Outreach’. The course involves class-
room instruction and hands-on time at COSI, where the students engage in outreach activities
with museum visitors. In addition, over the summer, this course is combined with a research in-
ternship for students admitted to our NSF-funded summer program for undergraduates (NSF
REU Site: The Science of Language and the Language of Science).

One of the primary aims of the course is to develop future scientists and other language sci-
ence professionals who can effectively communicate scientific understanding of language to di-
verse audiences by drawing on principles and practices of informal science education. As part of
the classroom instruction, students learn about core concepts in informal science learning, in-
cluding the six strands [shown in (1) above] and key strategies in the informal science setting
(e.g., juxtaposition, multiple modes, interactivity, and social interaction). Students draw on their
learning about informal science education as they develop, practice, and discuss ways to pro-
mote better understanding of language and linguistics, generate interest in and excitement
about language and science, and convey to a wider public that language is a domain that can
be – and is – investigated scientifically.

Students’ outreach activities center on a set of demonstrations we have developed that are
built around simple hands-on activities, each of which illustrates a basic concept in language sci-
ence. Demonstrators stand on the museum f loor and engage passing visitors with a simple open-
ing line, such as ‘Want to play a game?’. As the interaction between the demonstrator and the
museum visitor(s) unfolds, the demonstrator introduces key points as appropriate. The demon-
strator adjusts the activity to the age, comprehension, and interest level of a given visitor or
group of visitors and presents the concepts in a pyramid structure, starting with the core take-
home message and broadening to more complex knowledge with those visitors who are willing
and able to pursue it.

Our demonstrations cover a range of subfields in linguistics, including psycholinguistics (e.g.,
the Stroop test), language acquisition (e.g., word learning strategies), dialect variation (e.g., a
dialect quiz), sign languages (e.g., counting to 10 in American Sign Language and British
Sign Language), audiology (e.g., the dangers of too-loud earbuds), sentence processing (e.g.,
semantic illusions), and phonetics (e.g., iPad apps about the visual representation of sound).
Written guidelines are maintained for each demonstration and are used for training students.
The guidelines include background readings, instructions for completing the activity with vis-
itors, and the pyramid of concepts.1 The capstone writing project for the course is to create
guidelines for a new demonstration. Although this assignment is very challenging, every section
of the class has produced at least one student-created demonstration currently in use.

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

Linguistics in a Science Museum 425

The Language Pod has also coordinated with faculty teaching other language courses on
campus to have their students create educational outreach slides that can be displayed to the
COSI public. For example, one set of slides currently on display is a guessing game about his-
torical word derivations for animal names (e.g., puccha > fox) created by students in a History
of English class. In this way, we aim to broaden the range of linguists participating in outreach
as well as the range of topics we cover at the museum.

Museum visitors’ interest in interacting with faculty further inspired us to begin a program of
‘Language Fairs’ that facilitate direct contact between faculty working in the lab and COSI vis-
itors. Language Fairs are held periodically throughout the year on the museum f loor in front of
the lab. Three to five researchers prepare demonstrations and share them with COSI visitors
during a 2–3-hour event. These demonstrations are typically linked to the researchers’ own
work, but the fairs also serve as an opportunity for senior members of the lab to pilot new out-
reach activities for future use by the students.

4.3. INTEGRATING RESEARCH AND TEACHING

Since the Language Pod opened in 2012, 36 different research projects have been conducted,
and over 10,000 COSI visitors have contributed to these projects as participants. The studies
are conducted by faculty, post-doctoral researchers, and graduate students from eight OSU de-
partments (Computer Science and Engineering, English, Linguistics, Music, Psychology, Span-
ish and Portuguese, Speech and Hearing Sciences, and Teaching and Learning). Over 100
undergraduate students have also been involved in the lab as research assistants, participant re-
cruiters, and/or explainers of ongoing research. Thus, as in many campus labs, the research pro-
cess itself involves training graduate and undergraduate students in language sciences research.
The students in the ‘Training in Informal Science Outreach’ course are also integrated with
the research component of the lab: they complete human subjects research ethics training and
are listed as key personnel on lab research projects. They also receive training in the recruit-
ment of museum visitors to be participants in ongoing research. Our recruitment techniques
are probably the one aspect of our research that is dramatically different from those used in
other settings. Student recruiters go out on the museum f loor and simply ask museum visitors
if they ‘want to be in a science experiment’. If visitors are interested, students provide informa-
tion about the experiment’s topic and length. If visitors continue to be interested, the recruiters
escort them into the lab where a research assistant obtains informed consent and conducts the
experiment. The lab provides no incentives to visitors to participate beyond the opportunity to
be in a research study. Nevertheless, our recruiters typically report a 75–80% hit rate of visitors
agreeing to participate.

To facilitate their recruitment efforts and their potential future relationship with the lab, stu-
dents in the training course learn about the different experiments being conducted in the lab
throughout the semester, interact with student and faculty researchers, and witness what lan-
guage science research in action looks like. Several students have gone on to become research
assistants in the lab.

5. Case Studies

In Section 4, we provided an overarching description of the Language Pod, with an emphasis on
the infrastructure that supports our research, teaching, and outreach efforts. In this section, we
present two case studies to illustrate more concretely the integration of research, teaching,
and outreach in the lab. Each case study ref lects a domain of research that is central to the lab
– the first defined by its topic (dialect) and the second by its method (eye-tracking). In both

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

domains, multiple researchers are engaged in the research area, and a number of different re-
search studies are being conducted.

426 Laura Wagner et. al

5.1. CASE STUDY 1: DIALECT

Language variation, particularly regional US dialects, is a topic of widespread interest as well as
widespread misinformation and also happens to be a research focus for several of our faculty.
Research projects on variation span multiple topics and departments. One line of research
(stemming from Campbell-Kibler, 2012) investigates the construction of accentedness within
the state of Ohio, contrasting the treatment of established and widely circulated registers (Agha
2007) like Southern or country speech with the less well-known difference between the Inland
North and Midland varieties (Labov et al. 2006). Participants are asked to listen to a set of talkers
and rate them for how accented they sound.

The methods for this project are quite similar to those employed in other perception research,
with some modifications made for the museum environment. One distinctive aspect of this
project is that the structure of the task allows groups of individuals to participate together, so that
all interested members of a visitor group are taken to a conference room within the lab space to
participate at once. Short stimuli from 15 talkers are played one by one over a portable speaker
system, and participants mark their accent assessment on a visual analog scale on a response sheet.
After all talkers are presented, participants turn over their response sheets to provide their age,
sex, regional history, and racial/ethnic identification. They also rate their perceptions of
accentedness for different locations within Ohio (e.g., central Ohio, northwest Ohio, etc.). Par-
ticipants are then asked a series of questions about their experience with the task and their per-
ceptions of the talkers. Finally, the project is explained in depth as the visitors are debriefed.

One of the great benefits to conducting research in the Language Pod is the abundance of
children, including both pre-school-aged children as well as school-aged children, who are in
the company of their parents or legal guardians. Several of our studies capitalize on this availabil-
ity, examining the development of different aspects of dialect awareness, including their ability
to classify talkers by their dialect ( Jones et al. 2015; Yan et al. 2014), their implicit attitudes to-
wards talkers of different dialects (McCullough et al. 2015), and their ability to understand dif-
ferent accents in noisy environments (Hill et al. 2015; Mabie et al. 2015). All of these studies
involve working with individual child participants on a desktop computer using methods that
can be – and have been – used in many other environments, such as forced-choice selection,
ratings, and lexical identification. When the lab was originally equipped, one potential concern
was that children would find the glass-enclosed space too distracting to be able to complete re-
search studies. With that in mind, the desktop stations are set up along the wall so that partici-
pants face away from the museum, thus minimizing visual distractions. In addition, when
participants listen to speech sounds, audio is presented over high quality circumaural head-
phones. Distraction has not proved to be an issue, however, and participants – including chil-
dren – typically remain engaged with the task throughout each experiment.

Dialect research is integrated into our outreach in several ways. The debriefing discussions
following dialect-related experiments tend to be more extensive than they are for other studies,
as visitors often have many questions and comments about the topic. Research assistants are
trained to facilitate discussions that combat misconceptions and biases and encourage scientific
curiosity about linguistic differences. On the museum f loor, one of our popular demonstrations
walks visitors through the New York Times’ dialect survey (Vaux & Golder, 2002) online in-
terface, leading to discussions of the overall idea of regional variation and some of its phonetic
and lexical features. More generally, several demonstrations focusing on speech sounds (such as

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

Linguistics in a Science Museum 427

one showing what sound looks like on a spectrogram) regularly lead to discussions of variation,
especially regional variation.

Our educational efforts, both in the undergraduate training course and in the NSF-funded
summer internship program, likewise foreground language variation. Introducing students to
the natural variation of human language is a key course goal, as is developing their skill in
correcting common misconceptions about language. Students finish the course understanding
the inherently variable nature of language, with the tools to spark interest and curiosity about
it in others, including museum visitors. Recent evaluations of students from two semesters of
our training course showed that students finished the course with a more accurate understand-
ing of seven common myths related to language variation, raising their average score from 5.69
(out of 7) at the start of the course to 6.13 at the end.

5.2. CASE STUDY 2: EYE-TRACKING

The lab is equipped with two eye-trackers: one is a stationary screen-based system (Tobii T60),
and the other is a mobile head-mounted system (ASL Mobile eye XG). Several researchers in
the lab conduct experiments with these systems using museum visitors as participants. For exam-
ple, one study using the head-mounted system investigates adults’ ability to use prosody (specif-
ically, contrastive stress) while listening to spoken instructions (Ito et al. 2015). Participants hear
pre-recorded adjective-noun pairs (e.g., ‘blue bell’) and choose the named ornament from an
array organized by ornament type to hang on a small Christmas tree. The task is action-based
and naturalistic. The dependent variable is the participants’ eye-gaze to the different parts of
the display as monitored by the tracker. For example, participants hear instructions to hang a
‘green bell’ and then a ‘BLUE bell’: this felicitous use of a prominent pitch accent on the adjec-
tive ‘blue’ signals a contrast. Looks to the bell area of the ornament array begin shortly after the
onset of the noun and are speeded relative to when the adjective does not carry a prominent
accent. In a misleading condition, participants hear instructions to hang a ‘green bell’ and then
a ‘BLUE drum’: in this case, participants often make early looks to the (incorrect) bell section of
the array first, on the basis of the contrastive prosodic marking on the adjective. These ‘garden-
path’ looks delay their looks to the mentioned ornament area compared to when the adjective
does not carry a prominent accent to mark contrast.

A series of previous studies using the Christmas tree decoration task (e.g., Ito & Speer 2008;
2011) demonstrated that a prominent pitch accent evokes a contrastive interpretation, with imme-
diate effects on the participants’ eye-gaze. However, these past studies always used prescribed into-
nation contours produced by a trained phonetician. The ongoing study compares such ‘laboratory
speech’ to spontaneous speech produced by a naïve speaker in a similar decoration task (Ito & Speer
2006). Despite measurable differences in the implementation of pitch accents between the trained
and spontaneous speakers (Turnbull et al. 2014), results with the spontaneous speech replicate past
findings, demonstrating that the effect of a prominent accent is not an artifact of laboratory speech.
The research results obtained in the museum lab are consistent with those obtained in more
traditional university campus laboratories. This fact is not surprising as the methods, including
the technology, the materials, and the experimental design, are all the same. The primary accom-
modation to the museum setting is that participants typically wear noise-canceling headphones to
ensure that they can clearly hear the speech stimuli because the ambient noise levels of the mu-
seum lab are somewhat louder than those of a typical campus-based lab. Moreover, the special
participant pool of the museum has allowed for established results to be generalized to a new
population: adults older than average college undergraduates also show these effects. Additional
eye-tracking studies in the lab have also taken advantage of the presence of children among the
museum visitors to examine the development of online processing abilities with age.

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

428 Laura Wagner et. al

The eye-tracking studies integrate nicely with our outreach efforts: if the participant wearing
the tracker agrees, the tracker’s video data recordings can be displayed on a large screen to COSI
visitors just outside the lab. The screen can show the view of the ongoing experiment either
from the participant’s perspective, with cross-hairs tracking their fixations in the visual field,
or it can show the view from the experimenter’s perspective, including a close-up of the moving
eye with overlaid geometric forms used to maintain calibration. Even without taking part in the
study itself, visitors can learn about eye movements by watching the moving patterns of the par-
ticipant’s gaze. Somewhat more distally, some of our interactive f loor demonstrations highlight
research results in online sentence processing. Thus, the lab offers several ways for visitors to
learn about the online processing of language: through short interactive activities, by watching
an eye-tracking study as it happens, or by participating in one themselves.

The eye-tracking research is also well-integrated with our educational efforts. Eye-tracking re-
searchers in the lab conduct hands-on sessions in the lab as part of the ‘Eye-tracking for Studying
Language Processing’ course. This course is open to undergraduate students, graduate students,
and faculty who are interested in applying eye-tracking techniques to their language-related re-
search projects. Course participants learn to design coordinated visual and auditory stimuli appli-
cable to studies using either the screen-based or the head-mounted eye-tracking systems in the
Language Pod. This course also has an outreach dimension: while it is training researchers in
eye-tracking technology, it is also showing museum visitors what such training looks like.

6. Conclusions

We appreciate that our fully integrated and embedded presence within a museum may not be
easy to replicate in its entirety elsewhere. However, museums are increasingly interested in
partnering with university researchers to bring a real science experience to the public, whether
that involves actually conducting research with visitors, training students as informal science ed-
ucators, being observed in the process of research design and experiment development, or sim-
ply having a research professional show off their science. Linguistics is a particularly good science
to bring to science museums because language provides an accessible entry point to science for
the general public, and many language science demonstrations are low-cost and easy to conduct
anywhere and with a diverse audience. The research carried out in a science museum setting is
itself an effective form of linguistics outreach, especially when combined with activities such as
demonstrations, language fairs, and/or debriefings designed with informal science education
goals, principles, and strategies in mind. Our research benefits from drawing on a broad cross-
section of the population, and outreach efforts can further benefit linguistics by increasing the
discipline’s visibility and the public perception of its value. Through experiences as language sci-
ence educators, students deepen their understanding of – and in many cases, their identification
with – the language sciences. At the same time, they develop skills in communicating complex
concepts to diverse audiences and in sparking interest in the scientific study of language.

There are many ways that we as linguists can share our knowledge and our enthusiasm about
language. In our experience, the science museum setting affords the opportunity and inspiration
to integrate research, teaching, and outreach in ways that are productive and exciting for mu-
seum visitors, our students, ourselves, and our discipline.

Acknowledgement

The authors express their gratitude for the financial support provided for the Language Pod by
several sources. Seed funding was provided by the OSU Office of Research and the OSU De-
partments of Linguistics and Psychology. Additional material support has been provided by the
OSU College of Arts and Sciences, the OSU Division of Social and Behavioral Sciences, the

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

OSU Office of Outreach and Engagement, and the OSU Center for Cognitive and Brain
Sciences. Our work has also been funded by the Battelle Foundation. The National Science
Foundation funds student internships in the Language Pod through the Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) program.

Linguistics in a Science Museum 429

Short Biographies

Laura Wagner is the Director of the Language Sciences Research Lab and an Associate Professor
in the OSU Psychology department. She has a PhD in Linguistics from the University of
Pennsylvania. Her research focuses on language acquisition, especially children’s acquisition of
meaning across a variety of domains.

Shari R. Speer is a Research Director of the Language Sciences Research Lab and Professor,
Director of the Psycholinguistics Laboratories, and Chair of the OSU Department of Linguis-
tics. She has a PhD in Human Experimental Psychology from the University of Texas at Austin.
Her research focuses on the role of intonation and prosody in language production and
comprehension.

Leslie C. Moore is the Education Director of the Language Sciences Research Lab and an
Associate Professor in the OSU Teaching and Learning Department and is also affiliated with
Utrecht University. She has a PhD in Applied Linguistics from the University of California at
Los Angeles. Her research focuses on the social and cultural patterning of learning and language
development and use in multilingual communities.

Elizabeth A. McCullough is a post-doctoral researcher in the Language Sciences Research
Lab. She has a PhD in Linguistics from the Ohio State University. Her research focuses on
the perception of foreign accented speech.

Kiwako Ito is the Eye-tracking Coordinator for the Language Sciences Research Lab and a
Senior Researcher in the OSU Department of Linguistics. She has a PhD in Linguistics from
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champagin. Her research focuses on the role of prosody
in speech comprehension among adults and children speaking English and Japanese, as well as
among individuals with developmental disabilities.

Cynthia G. Clopper is a Research Director for the Language Sciences Research Lab and an
Associate Professor in the OSU Department of Linguistics. She has a PhD in Linguistics and
Cognitive Science from Indiana University. Her research focuses on the role of linguistic and
social variation in spoken language processing.

Kathryn Campbell-Kibler is the Outreach Director for the Language Sciences Research Lab
and an Associate Professor in the OSU Department of Linguistics. She has a PhD in Linguistics
from Stanford University. Her research focuses on language variation, including the role of the
listener in variation and the role of language in the formation and performance of identity.

Notes

* Correspondence address: LauraWagner, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA. E-mail: wagner.602@osu.
edu

1Guidelines for some of our more popular demonstrations may be found at http://bln.osu.edu/Outreach.php.

Works Cited
Agha, Asif. 2007. The object called ‘language’ and the subject of linguistics. Journal of English Linguistics 35:217–35.
Alpert, Carol Lynn. 2013. A guide to building partnerships between science museums and university-based research centers.

Online: http://www.risepartnerguide.org.

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

430 Laura Wagner et. al

Bell, Philip, Bruce Lewenstein, Andrew W. Shouse, and Michael A. Feder (eds.) 2009. Learning Science in Informal Environ-

ments: People, Places, and Pursuits. Washington, D. C.: The National Academies Press.

Bucholtz, Mary, Audrey Lopez, Allina Mojarro, Elena Skapouilli, Chris VanderStouwe, and Shawn Warner-Garcia. 2014.
Sociolinguistic justice in the schools: student researchers as linguistic experts. Language and Linguistics Compass 8. 144–57.
Callanan, Maureen A. 2012. Conducting cognitive developmental research in museums: theoretical issues and practical

considerations. Journal of Cognition and Development 13.137–151.

Campbell-Kibler, Kathryn. 2012. Contestation and enregisterment in Ohio’s imagined dialects. Journal of English Linguistics

Clark, Billy, and Graeme Trousdale. 2012. The language detective: a course for young linguists. Language and Linguistics

Culicover, Peter W., and Elizabeth Hume. 2013. Teaching about how language works to diverse populations. Language and

40.281–305.

Compass 6.506–16.

Linguistics Compass 7.523–33.

Denham, Kristin, and Anne Lobeck (eds.) 2014. Linguistics at School: Language Awareness in Primary and Secondary Education.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Estival, Dominique, Cathy Bow, John Henderson, Barbara Kelly, Mary Laughren, Elisabeth Mayer, Diego Mollá, Colette
Mrowa-Hopkins, Rachel Nordlinger, Verna Rieschild, Andrea C. Schalley, Alexander W. Stanley, and Jill Vaughan.
2014. Australia loves language puzzles: The Australian Computational and Linguistics Olympiad (OzCLO). Language
and Linguistics Compass 8.659–70.

Fenichel, Marilyn, and Heidi A. Schweingruber. 2010. Surrounded by Science: Learning Science in Informal Environments.

Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press.

Fitzgerald, Colleen M. 2010. Developing a service-learning curriculum for linguistics. Language and Linguistics Compass 4.204–18.
Hill, Angela, Rachael Frush Holt, and Tessa Bent. 2015. Children’s Perception of Foreign-Accented Speech: The Role of Executive

Function. Poster Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Auditory Society, Scottsdale, AZ.

Honda, Maya, and Wayne O’Neil. 1993. Triggering science-forming capacity through linguistic inquiry. The View from
Building 20: Essays in Linguistics in Honor of Sylvain Bromberger, ed. by Ken Hale and Samuel Jay Keyser, 229–55.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Ito, Kiwako and Shari R. Speer. 2006. Using interactive tasks to elicit natural dialogue. Methods in Empirical Prosody Research,
ed. by Stefan Sudhoff, Denisa Lenertova, Roland Meyer, Sandra Pappert, Petra Augurzky, Ina Mleineck, Nicole Richter,
and Johannes Schließer, 229–57. Mouton de Gruyter: Boston, MA.

——. 2008. Anticipatory effect of intonation: eye movements during instructed visual search. Journal of Memory and Language

58.541–73.

——. 2011. Semantically-independent but contextually-dependent interpretation of contrastive accent. Prosodic Catego-
ries: Production, Perception and Comprehension, ed. by Sónia Frota, Gorka Elordieta, and Pilar Prieto, 69–92.
Springer: New York, NY.

Ito, Kiwako; Rory Turnbull; and Shari R. Speer. 2015. Allophonic tunes of contrast: lab and spontaneous speech lead to
equivalent ﬁxation responses. Experimental and Theoretical Approaches to Prosody, 3 (ETAP3), University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign.

Jones, Zack; Laura Wagner; and Cynthia Clopper. 2015. Children’s classiﬁcation of regional dialect. Poster Presented at the So-

ciety for Research on Child Development Conference (SRCD), Philadelphia, PA.

Labov, William. 1982. Objectivity and commitment in linguistic science. Language in Society 11.165–201.
Labov, William; Sharon Ash; and Charles Boberg. 2006. Atlas of North American English: Phonetics, Phonology and Sound

Labov, William, and Ingrid Rosenfelder. 2011. The Philadelphia Neighborhood Corpus. Online: http://fave.ling.upenn.

Lidz, Jeffrey, and Yakov Kronrod. 2014. Expanding our reach and theirs: when linguists go to high school. Language and

Mabie, Sarah, Rachael Frush Holt, and Tessa Bent. 2015. Children’s Perception of Foreign-Accented Speech: The Role of Temper-

ament. Poster Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Auditory Society, Scottsdale, AZ.

Maclagan, Margaret, and Elizabeth Gordon. 1999. Data for New Zealand social dialectology: the Canterbury corpus. New

Zealand English Journal 13.50–8.

McCullough, Elizabeth, Cynthia Clopper, and Laura Wagner. 2015. Development of implicit language attitudes in children.

Poster Presented at the Society for Research on Child Development Conference (SRCD), Philadelphia, PA.

Purnell, Thomas, Eric Raimy, and Joseph Salmons. 2013. Making linguistics matter: building on the public’s interest in

language. Language and Linguistics Compass 7.398–407.

Reaser, Jeffrey, and Carolyn Adger. 2007. Developing language awareness materials for nonlinguists: lessons learned from the

Do You Speak American? curriculum development project. Language and Linguistics Compass 1.155–67.

Rickford, John R. 1997. Unequal partnership: sociolinguistics and the African American speech community. Language in

Society 26.161–97.

Change. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

edu/pnc.html.

Linguistics Compass 8.449–63.

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

Linguistics in a Science Museum 431

—— 2000. Sociolinguistics and the public: digging and being dug in return. American Speech 75. 273–75.
Sacco, Kalie, John H. Falk, and James Bell. 2014. Informal science education: lifelong, life-wide, life-deep. PLoS Biol 12.

e1001986. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001986

Stewart, Jr., Thomas W., and Alma B. Kuhlemann Cárdenez. 2010. Discovering ‘language myths and truths’: a summer

enrichment course in linguistics for high-school students. Language and Linguistics Compass 4.80–95.

Turnbull, Rory, Adam Royer, Kiwako Ito, and Shari R. Speer. 2014. Prominence perception in and out of context. Pro-

ceedings of the 7th international conference on Speech Prosody, pp.1164–1168.

Vaux, Bert, and Scott A. Golder. 2002. The dialect survey. Online: http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2013/12/20/

sunday-review/dialect-quiz-map.html.

Wanjema, Shontael, Katie Carmichael, Abby Walker, and Kathryn Campbell-Kibler. 2013. The Ohio Speaks Project:

engaging undergraduates in sociolinguistic research. American Speech 88.223–35.

Wolfram, Walt. 1993. Ethical considerations in language awareness programs. Issues in Applied Linguistics 4. 225–55.
——. 2011. In the profession: connecting with the public. Journal of English Linguistics 40.111–117.
Wolfram, Walt, Jeffrey Reaser, and Charlotte Vaughn. 2008. Operationalizing linguistic gratuity: from principle to practice.

Language and Linguistics Compass 2. 1109–34.

Yan, Qingyang, Cynthia Clopper, and Laura Wagner. 2014. The development of perceptual dialect categories from child-
hood through adulthood. Poster presented at the International Association for the Study of Child Language (IASCL), Am-
sterdam, the Netherlands.

© 2015 The Author
Language and Linguistics Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Language and Linguistics Compass 9/7 (2015): 420–431, 10.1111/lnc3.12164

View publication stats
View publication stats

