Huriye ARMAĞAN DOĞAN

Art History & Criticism / Meno istorija ir kritika 16
ISSN 1822-4555 (Print), ISSN 1822-4547 (Online)

https://doi.org/10.2478/mik-2020-0004

Institute of Architecture and Construction, Kaunas University of Technology, 
Kaunas, Lithuania

PERCEPTION OF THE MODERN MOVEMENT IN ARCHITECTURE          65

AS CULTURAL HERITAGE

Summary. When the definition of cultural heritage in architecture is questioned 
regarding the perception of society,
the results demonstrate that people identify cultural heritage as both material 
and spiritual achievements in the
past and as a reflection of identity associated with historical monuments. 
Furthermore, the distinction between
monument and cultural heritage does not have a well-distinguished definition 
for society in most cases. Therefore,
the perception of people in the appraisal of cultural heritage consistently 
obscures the protection process, especially
regarding the heritage of the Modern Movement era in architecture which started 
to be seen in the 20th  century.
While the experts acknowledge Modern Movement artefacts as cultural heritage, 
in most cases the perception of
non-experts differs. Therefore, its architectural merit is not appreciated by 
society in the way it deserves, neither as
an   artefact nor as cultural heritage. By both literature review and performed 
research, this paper aims to analyse the
reasons which create deprecation regarding the evaluation of Modern Movement 
heritage. Furthermore, it tries to
suggest a series of actions which can be taken for achieving the protection of 
Modern Movement heritage.

Keywords: Modern Movement, perception, heritage, strategy, value.


INTRODUCTION

Cultural  Heritage  in  the  broader  scope  can  be
defined as an expression of living for societies, which
they have developed over time and passed from one
generation  to  the  next  by  the  customs  and  prac-
tices they have. Furthermore, it can include places,
artefacts,  architectural  objects,  artistic  expressions
and values. Therefore, cultural heritage can be both
tangible and intangible, and it can produce tangible
representations of intangible values for the people.

According to the Council of Europe, cultural her-
itage is a group of resources inherited from the past
which  people  identify,  independently  of  ownership,
as   a  reflection  and  expression  of  their  constantly
evolving values, beliefs, knowledge and traditions. It
includes all aspects of the environment resulting from
the  interaction  between  people  and  places  through
time.1 Regarding this definition, it is possible to state
that one of the essential characteristics of cultural
heritage, either tangible or intangible, is the reflec-
tion  of it on both the environment and society.

According to Watson and Bentley, historic buildings
and neighbourhoods can connect residents to their

roots.2  Furthermore, they can embed their collective
memory and reflect their cultural identity, as well as
personal identity. Historic buildings can assure social
life and establish the continuity of society and cul-
ture. Therefore, it can pass cultural identity to future
generations. As Tveit et al. state, landscapes which
contain both past and present can provide integrity
and quality to the communities who live in that envi-
ronment.3  As a result, the sustainability of historical
environments can evoke strong images for the society
and observers who are experiencing the place.

However, when the Modern Movement and its lan-
guage evolved in the early 20th century, the impact
of the buildings on the environment and the genius
loci ceased. The language of the Modern Movement
was affected by various factors, which were related
to the technical, economic and social circumstances
of the period. However, one of the most important
motivations of architects in this era was the ambition
to establish a modern architecture for the modern
industrialised  society.  As  Heynen  states,  the  new
architecture in the 1920s became associated with the
desire for a more socially balanced and egalitarian


form of society in which the ideals of equal rights
are represented.4  However, when trying to establish
equality between people and setting universal values,
the newly adopted values did not involve traditional
associations in freshly formed societies. Therefore,

66           the  movement  which  shaped  the  society  and  the

architecture  in  this  new  era  became  more  secular
and progressive. Still, it concurrently disrupted the
connection with history and architectural traditions
as        well as the vernacular architecture.

In  a  contemporary  perspective,  devaluation  aris-
ing  from  the  obsolescence  of  the  materials  and
functions of these buildings blended with the lack
of appreciation in the appraisal of them as cultural
heritage by society. However, identifying the factors
which are catalysing this negative impact on peo-
ple’s perception is not always clear. Therefore, this
paper aims, both by literature review and performed
research, to analyse the reasons which create depre-
cation regarding the evaluation of Modern Move-
ment heritage. The paper begins with the definition
of cultural heritage and its value. In the following
section,  it  gives  information  about  the  language
of   the Modern Movement and tries to identify the
characteristics  which  make  its  appraisal  different
from      other  cultural  heritage  objects  from  earlier
eras. Subsequently, the paper explains the outcomes
of research which took place in Kaunas, Lithuania
in 2019 regarding the identification of people’s per-
ception of Modern Movement heritage by the usage
of  various  experiment  techniques,  such  as  social
survey and eye-tracking technology. The paper then
discusses possible solutions and approaches for the
protection  of  Modern  Movement  artefacts  which
can     be valuable in the protection and continuity of
these structures.

CULTURAL HERITAGE AND ITS VALUE

In  her  book  ‘Uses  of  Heritage’,  Smith  states  that
there is no such thing as heritage and heritage had
to be experienced for it to be heritage.5 Even though
this statement might seem assertive, it is true that
heritage only stays alive if it is performed and prac-
tised, and there is a perception which innates that
cultural value of the heritage is tied to time depth,

monumentality,  expert  knowledge  and  aesthetics.
According to the survey implemented by the Polish
Ministry of Culture and National Heritage Depart-
ment regarding the perception of Polish people on
cultural  heritage  in  2012,  the  participants  of  the
study  identified  cultural  heritage  as  both  material
and  spiritual  achievements  of  a  particular  social
group, and a part of the past, which is a testimony
to people’s identity, mostly associating the concept
with historical monuments. As Goral states, exam-
ples given by the participants were primarily archi-
tectural objects of great importance to the history
and cultural identity of the nation.6  This perception
is  not  limited  to  Polish  society,  and  most  people
tend to relate heritage with monumental architec-
tural objects. Therefore, this perception establishes
a  misunderstanding  in  societies,  and  it  results  in
people not giving cultural heritage the importance
that it deserves in many cases. One of the leading
characteristics of heritage is that it is a carrier rather
than a solid concept, and it only endures when it has
been used daily and perceived by society itself.

Over the centuries, the concept and the treatment
of  heritage  and  approaches  to  conservation  of  it
changed  as  values  changed.  One  of  the  first  peo-
ple  who  tried  to  work  on  different  values  of  cul-
tural heritage is Riegl, who wrote a study to define
the  theoretical  aspects  of  the  work.7   In  his  work,
he  described  the  development  of  the  concern  for
monuments  in  a  historical  context  and  identified
the different distinguished types of values which are
essential for the process of cultural heritage conser-
vation. Even though the values he coined appear to
be accurate (Can be seen in Fig. 1), some of them
might be relative. The age value of a building has
evidence which demonstrates how long that build-
ing  has  been  around;  furthermore,  it  might  also
depend on the contrast between the new and mod-
ern.  Moreover,  the  historical  value  might  depend
on the nation from time to time. A building or a
monument can contain meaning for a nation, but
not  for  other  nations.  Therefore,  while  trying  to
decide what to preserve and what not to, it is crucial
to understand the buildings in their own conditions
and their own environments. Moreover, artistic or
art value of heritage might be relative in some sense


as  well.  The  heritage  which  has  value  might  not
have the criterion of the understanding of aesthet-
ics  in  contemporary  meaning.  However,  it  might
still be unique for the period it has been established.
Therefore, values which were given to cultural herit-
age  are contingent; furthermore, they can only be
understood by the reflection of them in societies. As
a    result, all these values which have been decided
by scholars do not always have the representation of
them in societies. However, they provide the clas-
sification which is needed (Fig. 1).

As it can be evaluated from the table, the criterion
which was used in the 1990s is more about the theo-
retical  classification  for  identifying  values,  rather
than  demonstrating  the  impact  of  cultural  herit-
age in practice. As Gibson states, the value is not an
intrinsic quality but rather the fabric, object or envi-
ronment is the bearer of an externally imposed cul-
turally and historically specific meaning, that attracts
a  valued  status  depending  on  the  dominant  frame-
works of the value of the time and place.8  Therefore,
the commemorative value that Riegl defined in the
early 20th  century is one of the essential qualities of
the  heritage.  However,  it  has  the  emphasis  on  the
monuments or symbolic constructions as memorials
rather than the cultural heritage that societies have
and experience daily. Furthermore, the set of classifi-
cations which has been assembled in the contempo-
rary perspective does not have the ingredient of the
peoples’ perception of heritage, such as the memento
value. As Freidheim & Khalaf state, the value-based

approaches in the evaluation of cultural heritage tend
to fail, because the decisions are based on incomplete
understandings of heritage and its values.9  Further-
more, according to the proposed model of Stephen-
son, cultural heritage can be systematically classified

by forms, relationships and practices.10  This typol-             67

ogy intends to establish an attempt to capture how
both experts and non-experts perceive heritage. Fur-
thermore, it covers the interpretation of cultural her-
itage related to identity, memories and sense of place.
As a result, combining value-based approaches with
memento value and redefining the classification with
the  aspects  related  to  the  interpretation  of  society
can capture the full range of the perception. Build-
ings, artefacts and environments and the meanings
they represent are often integrally tied to the identity
and the memories of society; therefore, while analys-
ing the value of the heritage, it is essential not to omit
the invisible social context.

Heritage by itself can rarely hold its intangible pecu-
liarities if it is not adequately managed, moreover, if
it     is not perceived as cultural heritage by society. In
most cases, the impact of the invisible social con-
text while considering cultural heritage evaluation
has been given lower priority because it is hard to
measure. Nevertheless, one of the most important
elements which define the cultural heritage is peo-
ple’s perception. In that regard, the Modern Move-
ment heritage is also ambiguous because they lack
the  perceived  inherent  value  and  memento  value
for   society.   Therefore,   these   characteristics   of

Fig. 1. The classification regarding the values of cultural heritage which was 
suggested by different organisations


the  Modern  Movement  establish  a  paucity  in  the
appraisal of its artefacts as cultural heritage.

THE MODERN MOVEMENT AS CULTURAL
HERITAGE

68           According to Gusevich , the Modern Movement was
based on the elimination from the illiterate society
of  the  bourgeois  culture  that  applied  pretentious
ornament and kitsch to architecture, which took the
form   of eclecticism.11  Therefore, the usage of deco-
rative elements and ornaments from different archi-
tectural periods in an eclectic approach motivated
the  architects  of  the  time  to  work  towards  a  new
architectural  language  which  would  be  applicable
all    around the world.

However,  creating  an  international  style  required
making changes in the existing language of architec-
ture which had been in use for centuries. According
to Zevi, the classical language in architecture con-
tained numerous variables such as symmetry, per-
spective and proportion.12 However, the language of
the Modern Movement was based on variables, and
even if the function was the same, it was possible
to express the characteristics of the same function
in  various  ways.  Therefore,  the  new  architectural
language which was established in this period was
formed by the creation of an inventory which helped
to produce free mass, free surface and free plans. Le
Corbusier, one of the pioneers and the creators of
the language of the Modern Movement, explains in
his book ‘Towards a New Architecture’ that archi-
tects should be given three reminders when using
the language of architecture. These reminders are;
mass, surface and plan. According to Le Corbusier,
the interaction between these three elements estab-
lishes the architectural object.13  As he states, mass
and surface are the elements that architecture itself
manifests, and the plan determines these two ele-
ments. However, when the interaction between the
plan and surface is analysed in the language of the
Modern Movement, it is possible to state that even
though the plan is functional for the users, in most
cases the surfaces are not as functional as the plan.
Furthermore, most of them do not reflect or repre-
sent culture or memento for the people even though

they are the elements where people have their first
interactions with the structures.

What  façade  represents  to  people,  or  even  the
importance of the façade in the scale of the city, was
understood  differently  by  some  architects  in  the
Modern Movement period. As Tozer states, Adolf
Loos  regarded  ornament  convenient  for  applying
to the public buildings, however not for residential
buildings,  because,  according  to  Loos,  the  blank
façades of residential buildings could operate as a
mask, so that, the inhabitants could lead their own
private lives, while public buildings needed to com-
municate  their  functions.14    However,  residential
buildings also have a reflection in environments, and
they cooperate in the establishment of the image of
the city. Furthermore, as Maria Szadkowska quoted
from an interview of Adolf Loos, he stated that “I
never play around with the façade, that’s not where I
live. Take out your chairs, sit in the middle of the street
in the rain and look at the façade. If I make a façade
toward the street, I try to make the ground floor nice,
at most put marble around the floor above it. Above
this level I leave it bare, I can’t see that far myself…
”15  Therefore, even though façades are the elements
where people have their first interactions with the
structures, and they are the displays of the design
for the people who are living in the environment,
most of the time Modern Movement surfaces and
the language it used were ambiguous and did not
reflect the interior or the characteristics of the peo-
ple who inhabit them, which eventually prompted
problems and discussions about them.

One of the problems that occurred with this modern
architecture was an argument about the systems and
the form languages which were adopted by this style
not  having  been  sufficiently  tested  or  proven.  The
most specific example of that was the use of horizon-
tal windows and flat roofs, which were incorporated
in many designs. Traditionalists argued that vertical
windows light rooms more efficiently. Furthermore,
the  flat  roofs  were  not  achieving  the  goal  of  con-
ducting the water away from the façade, protecting
it from weather conditions. Therefore, these forms
were not functional. As Michl stated at a conference
which took place in the United Kingdom in 2011,
although  the  idea  of  functionalism  in  modernism


is seemingly aimed at the user, the root ‘function’ in
‘functionalism’ is provided as a classification of the
place where the forms are to be extracted.16  There-
fore, it was not firstly about the function itself, but it
was more about the form. As a result, the architec-
tural language that the Modern Movement adopted
was not aimed at the user. In that regard, the Modern
Movement can be criticised. However, in the imple-
mentation of the Modern Movement, it is possible to
trace different representations in different countries.

The second problem was the language of the Mod-
ern Movement, and its attempts on establishing a
universal language, and an international style which
was functional for everybody. However, the univer-
sal language did not correspond to the perception
of the aesthetic values of every society. According
to Benevolo , Persico states that if someone wants
to consider an architecture which is apart from the
aesthetic  formulation,  rather  than  speaking  about
internationalism, they should return to the concept
of                  a world that is entirely rational and intelligent.17
The expression of the Modern Movement was overly
rational, and it was defined by material facts, rather
than the spiritual and cultural impacts of architec-
ture on people. Consequently, the Modern Move-
ment, in general, did not seem dependent on local
historicity or on any national vernacular architec-
ture, which established weakness in this style. Most
of the time, being international has been criticised
as forcing society for being identical and independ-
ent of local traditions. As Carrera states, the built
environment  which  is  dysfunctional  for  people  is
often         the  symptom  or  the  result  of  the  designers
conflicting  with  the  people  using  it.18   As  a  result,
when  the  buildings  stopped  considering  the  geo-
graphical  values  of  the  environment,  they  started
to    lose their local characteristics. At the same time,
they lost the peculiarity of being functional for the
people who are inhabiting in that area. However, it
should be possible to establish the form of the build-
ings  related  to  the  function  which  would  also  be
suitable for the users and their requirements. Fur-
thermore, adopting universal values but at the same
time using the traditional patterns can manage to
create an architecture which is sensitive towards the
values of the users.

In his Gentle Manifesto, Venturi states that “Space
and elements in architecture become readable and
workable in several ways when it is ‘both/and’ instead
of  ‘either/or’”.19   However,  having  both/and  should
not mean that the design needs to contain every-

thing  which  can  result  in  the  creation  of  eclectic             69

architecture. It implies that it is possible to consist
of various elements as long as it does not affect the
design itself. The both/and approach was not used
in the Modern Movement, especially in the sense of
ornaments, since the discourse was based on sim-
plicity and ornaments seen as if they were intricate.
However, ornaments are not alleged to interfere with
the simplicity, but they can also establish simplic-
ity when they are used in the right places with the
right intentions. In that regard, the usage of orna-
ment in architecture is even possible in the Modern
Movement.  Furthermore,  some  different  dialects
occurred in the language of the Modern Movement,
which contains ornaments and uses both form and
pattern languages for expression.

As  Salingaros  states,  along  with  the  many  other
changes that occurred with the industrialisation of
the building process in the 20th century, traditional
form languages around the world were lost.20 Devel-
opments  in  construction  technology,  engineering,
building materials such as steel, iron and plate glass,
culminated in a functional style, and this changed
the       way  architects  see  the  design.  The  form  lan-
guages that were applied in the previous approaches
started  to  transform  into  a  new  language  by  the
usage  of  modern  materials  and  techniques.  How-
ever,  the  aim  of  the  Modern  Movement  was  not
establishing  a  style,  but  more  about  developing  a
language  which  can  be  implemented  universally.
As  Habermas  states,  modernity  and  modernism
assumed that the present is a new era, therefore, it is
not     a continuation of the past. Still, instead, it tends
to grow out of the rupture with the past and tradi-
tions.21   Consequently,  modernism  in  architecture
focused  on  defining  transformations  in  building
design,  which  involved  changes  in  the  traditional
forms, materials and construction techniques of the
past for establishing the new era. As Gropius states,
emphasising architecture on individuals might be a
wrong approach; the ambition to develop a unitary


view  of  the  world  can  underline  the  requirement
to free the values of spirit from individual restric-
tions.22     However,   according   to   Hitchcock,   this
approach  established  placelessness,  which  can  be
cited  as the spirit of the Modern Movement at its

70           time.23  The language and the meaning of architec-

ture  are  the  reflections  of  cultural,  environmental
and traditional values. Thus, these values are essen-
tial while establishing a functional construction and
freeing the values of spirit from individual restric-
tions  can  have  consequences.  The  function  is  the
way of expressing desirable living conditions of the
users in physical forms; moreover, if the built envi-
ronment is not suitable for the everyday life of the
users,  people  might  eventually  attempt  to  change
it  to be more convenient for themselves. Therefore,
the  transformation  in  building  design  associated
with the Modern Movement, which created changes
in traditional forms, established different outcomes
as well as problems in the perception of the expres-
sion of Modern Movement language.

As Salingaros asserts, even though the minimalist
modernism was triumphant in its own terms with
the clearly defined geometrical expression, which is
related with the strong form language, it was ignor-
ing or not trying to accommodate the human pat-
terns (Fig. 2). Ultimately, it was incompatible with
the pattern language Alexander identified. He also
states that the approach in 20th  century architecture

was  replacing  or  refusing  the  pattern  language,
which was the result of evolutionary development.24

As Richards states, people are more likely to admire
what is already familiar to them and that they can
classify  in  their  own  circumstances.25    Therefore,
containing ornaments and traditional plan schemas
would help people to classify easier. Furthermore,
it   is still possible to see the pattern language in the
form of ornament or in the form of plan schemas
in the Modern Movement which demonstrates that
the Modern Movement did not deny all modes of
traditions or culture while it was trying to express
the design in a modernist form language in its dif-
ferent dialects.

When the Modern Movement started to be seen in
the  architectural  sphere,  the  attitude  towards  this
movement was detracting and not affirmative among
some  of  the  critics.  The  buildings  of  the  Modern
Movement were accused of being bleak, austere, and
uniform. In this period, the Goldman and Salatsch
building of Adolf Loos was one of those structures
which captured most of the critiques. According to
Frampton, the cartoon which was published in 1911
suggested  that  the  façade  of  the  building  was  not
that different from a maintenance hole cover on the
street.26   Furthermore,  as  asserted  by  Whalen,  due
to not carrying ornamentation above the windows,
the emperor allegedly stated that the building had
no eyebrows. Moreover, Schaukal, who is one of the

Fig. 2. Villa Savoye (Photograph from the official website of Le Corbusier 
Foundation)


allies and supporters of Loos, wrote that construct-
ing a façade which is sober, unadorned and naked
like this building requires courage.27 Therefore, even
from  the  beginning,  the  critics’  approach  towards
the Modern Movement and the structures which do
not contain ornaments was as sceptical as that of the
wider society.

As architect Kim Smith states in the documentary
“Coast  Modern”,  ninety  per  cent  of  people  do  not
want to live in or relate themselves to a modernist
house.28 One of the reasons for that can be explained
by   the fact that people cannot establish the bond they
need with modernist buildings, or with the environ-
ment these buildings are in, which even affects the
perception of it as cultural heritage when the build-
ings become older. Nevertheless, Modern Movement
buildings can be considered as more human-friendly
and more closely connected with the outside, which
is by design, and due to the usage of new materials
and specifically the usage of a considerable amount of
plate glass, which differs from traditional buildings.
While traditional houses are more akin to shelters
which separate people from the outer world, the pri-
mary focus of the Modern Movement was expand-
ing the inner space to the outside by large apertures,
and the aim of the architects was creating a feeling of
spacious design for the users. However, this charac-
teristic of the Modern Movement only establishes an
impact on the user of that building, but not on the
people who are inhabiting in that environment. As
a result, artefacts of the Modern Movement do not
have as much of an effect on the built environment
they are situated in generally.

One of the consequences of not significantly affect-
ing the built environment is also not having much of
an impact on the life of the people who inhabit that
environment. Therefore, it is possible to state that
most buildings designed by Modern Movement cri-
teria cannot as easily establish a place in the collec-
tive memory of societies. However, this can also be
the result of the fact that the extant Modern Move-
ment buildings do not contain age-value, because
the Modern Movement only started to be seen in
architecture in the early 20th century, and this fac-
tor should not be disregarded. However, it still influ-
ences its perception as cultural heritage in society,

furthermore, it impacts its preservation process. As
Campbell states, it is easy to create shapes and forms
in architecture but giving those shapes and forms
any  meaning  is  complicated.  By  not  connecting
shapes to any tradition, they would lack an essen-

tial frame of reference and also require site-specific-             71

ness.29    Therefore,  even  though  the  architectural
expression of the Modern Movement is considered
successful, it creates a scarcity of associations with
collective memory and traditions.

As a consequence, it generates an architecture which
is  possible  to  implement  anywhere  in  the  world,
which interferes with the perception of beauty, since
it  is not designed for the society it is implemented
in. As a result, the language that the Modern Move-
ment  uses  loses  its  meaning,  which  could  have
assisted  people  in  establishing  a  bond  and  place
attachment.  Moreover,  arguably  most  of  the  time,
the          first  impression  people  are  left  with  from  the
Modern Movement does not involve the feeling that
it       is cultural heritage.

As Rampley states, the difference between heritage
and history lies in the fact that the former negoti-
ates a relation to the past, primarily through reliance
on reified symbols of the past.30  One of the ways to
establish  this  relationship  is  through  the  surface.
As    Le Corbusier states, especially surface in archi-
tectural  objects,  gives  individuality  to  the  mass.31
However, when the surfaces of this movement are
evaluated, the sensation they provide is not of indi-
viduality. In that regard, it can be asserted that the
Modern  Movement  has  achieved  the  aim  it  was
focusing on. However, it also established a feeling in
society that the heritage of this movement does not
have the memento value which would help people
to connect themselves with constructions.

Even though the Modern Movement era represents
a  paucity  of  memento  value,  specialists  incline  to
preserve  the  artefacts  of  this  period.  As  Mörsch
states, no time in history does not reflect the period
by its architecture.32  Therefore, the artefacts of the
Modern  Movement,  too,  have  the  importance  of
historical documents. In some cases, iconic archi-
tectural objects of the Modern Movement have been
granted the label of World Heritage even only ten


years after they were constructed. The architecture
and ideology established by the Modern Movement
are, to some extent, a social reform, which secures
the evaluation of its objects as cultural heritage by
the heritage community, thereby emphasising their

72           importance. However, society does not regard this
style as heritage in most cases. According to Hoff-
man,  Charles  Jencks  states  that  hybridity  of  the

form allows for different kind of receptions, and it
extends the language of architecture by speaking to
the elite and at the same time to ordinary people.33
However,  the  language  of  the  Modern  Movement
does  not  contain  this  hybridity.  Therefore,  as  this
study suggests, it does not speak to non-experts, and
it does not give the impression to ordinary people
that it is worth preserving. As a result, the process
of preserving modern heritage becomes contentious
due to the language it uses.

According to Cunningham, over recent decades the
Modern Movement artefacts have been more at risk,
when compared with the built heritage of any other
period in history.34 Furthermore, as it has been stated
in the introduction section of the 10th DOCOMOMO
(DOcumentation  and  COnservation  of  buildings,
sites  and  neighbourhoods  of  the  MOdern  MOve-
ment) Conference Proceedings,  the challenge about
the artefacts of the Modern Movement era is the dif-
ficulty to maintain the architectural creations and the
intentions of them such as the continuously chang-
ing concept of it. Therefore, they require a distinctive

approach which can revalue the manifestations, and
redefine the meanings of it. The Modern Movement
is not just a style, but it has a dominant discourse
which  makes  it  a  movement  rather  than  merely  a
style. Therefore, these peculiarities establish an apo-
ria while preserving them, even though it contains all
the essential ingredients which makes it possible to
adapt them to new conditions.

DOCOMOMO  International,  which  is  one  of  the
independent organisations, has undertaken the mis-
sion of establishing criteria and documenting Mod-
ern Movement artefacts accurately. In its criterion
standards, the organisation tries to place emphasise
the technological, social, artistic and aesthetic merit,
and furthermore, referential value, and integrity of
the artefacts of this era. Additionally, the increas-
ing number of Modern Movement buildings being
protected  and  registered  by  UNESCO  establishes
an impact. However, while recognition of organisa-
tions and commissions such as DOCOMOMO and
UNESCO  can  help  to  protect  the  buildings  from
demolition and exploitation, it might not be enough
for  the  communities  to  acknowledge  the  value  of
these artefacts and promote them for cooperating
on their safeguarding. Furthermore, these artefacts
still need to be guarded against the effects of time,
weather,  improper  repairs  and  management.  As  a
result, adaptive re-use is still a vital intervention and
demands to be adequately implemented by experts
and  by  the  participation  of  the  society  who  are

Fig. 3. The building at Miško Street, 16, which was demonstrated in the 
experiment


living in that area. However, an appropriate adap-
tive re-use strategy for the artefacts of the Modern
Movement is still ambiguous.

ANALYSIS OF THE PERFORMED RESEARCH

The research which aimed to understand the percep-
tion  of  people  regarding  modern  movement  herit-
age took place in Kaunas, Lithuania in 2019.35  The
research involved the usage of eye-tracking technol-
ogy  for  understanding  what  are  the  specific  areas

which catch the attention of people when they are
looking  at  modern  movement  buildings,  and  how
these areas are affecting people’s evaluation. Thirty-
seven students of Kaunas University of Technology
participated  in  the  experiment  with  age  ranging

between 18 and 30 with the distribution of 18 females             73

and 19 males. The buildings which were chosen to
demonstrate  in  the  experiment  were  all  buildings
from Kaunas, which has been on the tentative list of
UNESCO since January 2017 (Fig. 3–5).

Fig. 4. The building at Kęstučio Street, 3, which was demonstrated in the 
experiment

Fig. 5. The building at E. Ožeškienės Street, 13, which was demonstrated in the 
experiment


According to the research, the areas which caught the
attention of the participants the most were the orna-
mented areas on the facades of the buildings (The
expression of the Modern Movement in Kaunas con-
tains the usage of ornaments) (Fig. 6) and expressive

74           architectural  elements  such  as  porthole  windows,

pediments and the main entrances (Fig. 7).

Furthermore,  the  analysis  also  demonstrates  that
when  the  façades  contain  blank  surfaces,  most  of
the gaze does not scan these areas. The participants
are still more likely to focus on the openings or the
lines on the façade (Fig. 8).

All  these  areas  where  participants  either  focus  or
not give us information regarding what people are

Fig. 6. An example sheet of the eye-tracking experiment which demonstrates the 
fixations

Fig. 7. An example sheet of the eye-tracking experiment which demonstrates the 
fixations


75

Fig. 8. An example sheet of the eye-tracking experiment which demonstrates the 
fixations


looking at when they are asked the question if a build-
ing is cultural heritage. The research does not aim to
generalise the results; however, it attempts to identify
the areas which are affecting people’s perception.

DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

One of the colossal problems with the protection or
adaptive re-use of the Modern Movement artefacts
is  the  new  regulations  in  building  design.  Nowa-
days, the performance value of the buildings, such
as  energy  sustainability,  is  an  essential  quality  for
the buildings; however, most of the buildings con-
structed in this period do not contain this require-
ment.  The  large  glass  areas  and  materials  which
do not provide thermal efficiency for the structure
affect energy sustainability. Therefore, even though
the buildings perform well in their own specifica-
tions, in the adaptive re-use, it yields a challenging
process to create a project which blends the obliga-
tions with original design. Furthermore, the materi-
als which have been used in the Modern Movement
buildings tend to be not as durable as the buildings
of the previous era. Usage of weak concrete, alumina
cement and synthetic paints is commonly seen in
this period. Moreover, experimental and not well-
determined materials have been implemented in the
designs. Therefore, these materials are susceptible to
degradation, and they require different intervention

methods for their long-term protection which needs
to be well-identified individually.

Another problem is the number of the artefacts pro-
duced  during  this  era.  According  to  Carmichael,
there are approximately 300 surviving works just of
Frank Lloyd Wright alone.36 Furthermore, as Wessel
de Jonge states, more buildings were constructed in
the 20th century compared with the number of build-
ings constructed during all prior periods.37  There-
fore, assigning new uses for these buildings, which
would be feasible and at the same time suitable also
becomes arguable. Furthermore, the artefacts of the
Modern  Movement  are  not  merely  limited  to  the
iconic buildings, but there are innumerable exam-
ples in residential and industrial neighbourhoods.
Therefore, maintaining these buildings and re-using
them   as museums or tourist attractions is not eco-
nomically feasible.

It is essential to involve society in action, so that it
would be possible to enhance the image by providing
more information about the building which would
derive more social involvement. In the case of Mod-
ern  Movement  heritage,  implementing  memory
points, which can be used for both providing and
receiving information, around the surroundings can
be valid.  Designing memory points as spaces where
people can spend time and look through books and
leaflets might make these points more attractive to


the people. Furthermore, establishing various strat-
egies for different age groups is also essential. There-
fore, implementing an approach like this can help to
use the community involvement both passively and
actively in the management of Modern Movement

76           heritage. Therefore, adoption of an approach which
emphasises  the  importance  of  this  architectural
style in architectural history with all of its aspects

and impact on social life might be a way to encour-
age people to understand its value.

In recent years, society participation has become a
more critical element in the evaluation and preser-
vation  process  of  cultural  heritage.  When  people
cannot relate with the construction or the environ-
ment, the process of achieving preservation, there-
fore, becomes more difficult, especially when Mod-
ern  Movement  architectural  objects  are  involved.
Educating  people  about  the  Modern  Movement
could have a noticeable impact on the perception of

it, moreover on the preservation of these heritages.

CONCLUSION

As stated in this paper, one of the most problematic
components of Modern Movement heritage is the
fact    that the buildings from this era lack the per-
ceived  inherent  value  and  memento  value  for  the
people by not using traditional elements and mate-
rials in its language. The artefacts from prior periods
tend to have an official stance, but the buildings with
Modern Movement expression do not contain any
remark of cultural memory nor are they determined
as historical documents by the people, which results
in deprecation. Furthermore, as the literature review
and prior research demonstrate, Modern Movement
structures  also  contain  ambiguous  features  which
make the appreciation of these structures compli-
cated. However, even though non-experts and ordi-
nary people might not appreciate the architectural
artefacts  of  the  Modern  Movement,  it  created  its
own scale of values in architectural history, and it is
worth passing on to future generations.

It is crucial to understand what people perceive and
what is significant for them when they evaluate her-
itage  buildings,  therefore,  researching  or  applying
strategies to these artefacts require the establishment

of new tools and methods, and furthermore, differ-
ent identification and selection criteria. When the
cultural heritage of the Modern Movement is well
expressed to non-experts, the consequences result-
ing  from  its  paucity  on  perceived  inherent  and
memento value might be solved.

References

Benevolo, Leonardo. History of Modern Architecture. Mas-
sachusetts: M.I.T Press, 1989.

Campbell,  Robert.  “Why  Don’t  the  Rest  of  Us  Like  the
Buildings the Architects Like?” Bulletin of the Ameri-
can Academy of Arts and Sciences 57 (2004): 22–25.

Carmichael,  Bradley  T.   “When  Modern  Becomes  His-
toric:  Preserving  the  Modernist  Building  Envelope”.
Journal  of  Building  Design  +  Construction,  (2012):
40–46.

Carrera,  Fabio.  “Is  the  Lamp  of  Memory  still  burning?
Memory in Architecture and in Urban Design.” MIT:
Department of Urban Studies and Planning, 1998.

Cunningham, Alan. Modern Movement Heritage, DOCO-
MOMO. London: E&FN Spon Publishing, 1998.

De Jonge, Wessel. “Sustainable Renewal of the Everyday
Modern”.  Journal  of  Architectural  Conservation  23
(2017): 62–105.

Doğan. Huriye Armağan. “Implementation of eye-track-
ing  technology  on  cultural  heritage  research  and
practice”. Journal of Creativity Games 7 (2019): 16–21.
Frampton, Kenneth. Modern Architecture: A Critical His-

tory. London: Thames and Hudson Press, 1992.

Freidheim,  L.  Harald  and  Khalaf,  Manal.  “The  Signifi-
cance of Values: Heritage Value Typologies Re-exami-
ned”.  International  Journal  of  Heritage  Studies  26
(2016): 466–481.

Gibson, Lisanne. Valuing Historical Environments. Farn-
ham: Ashgate Publishing, 2009.

Góral, Anna. “Cultural Heritage in the Cobweb of Mean-
ings”, Heritage 2014 – Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Heritage and Sustainable Devel-
opment. Barcelos: Green Lines Institute, 2014.

Gropius,   Walter.   Internationale   Architektur.   Munich:
Albert Lange Press, 1925.

Gusevich, Miriam. “Purity and Transgression: Reflection
on the Architectural Avantgarde’s Rejection of Kitsch”.
Discourse 1 (1988): 90–115.

Habermas, Jürgen. The Philosophical Discourse of Moder-
nity. Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1987.

Heynen,  Hilde.  “What  Belongs  to  Architecture?  Avant-
garde  Ideas  in  the  Modern  Movement.  Journal  of
Architecture 4 (1999): 129–147.

Hitchcock, Henry-Russell. International Style. New York:
Norton Press, 1966.

Hoffmann,  Gerhard.  From  Modernism  to  Post-Modern-
ism: Concepts and Strategies of Post-Modern American
Fiction. Amsterdam: Rodopi Press, 2005.

Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture. London: John
Rodker Publisher, 1931.


Michl, Jan. “The Modernist Idea of Architecture” (paper
presented at Plymouth University School of Architec-
ture, April 7, 2011).

Mörsch, Georg. Das Neue Bauen als Herausforderung an
die Denkmalpflege. Berlin: Unsere Kunst-denkmaeler,
1990.

Rampley, Matthew. Heritage, Ideology and Identity in Cen-
tral and Eastern Europe, Woodbridge: Boydell Press,
2012.

Richards, Jonathan. Façadism. Oxford: Routledge Press,
1994.

Riegl, Alos. The Modern Cult of Monuments: Its Essence
and Its Development. Wien: K. K. Zentral-Kommis-
sion für Kunst- und Historische Denkmale: Braumül-
ler, 1903.

Salingaros,  Nikos.  A  Theory  of  Architecture.  Solingen:
Umbau-Verlag Harald Puschel Press, 2006.

Smith,  Laurajane.  Uses  of  Heritage.  Oxford:  Routledge
Press, 2006.

Stephenson, Janet. “The Cultural Values Model: An Inte-
grated Approach to Values in Landscapes”. Journal of
Landscape and Urban Planning 84 (2008): 127–139.

Tozer, William Richard Eric. A Theory of Making: Archi-
tecture  and  Art  in  the  Practice  of  Adolf  Loos,  (PhD
diss., University College London, 2011).

Tveit, Mari Sundli., Sang, Åsa Ode and Fry, Gary. “Key
Concepts in a Framework for Analysing Visual Land-
scape  Character”.  Journal  of  Landscape  Research  31
(2006): 229–255.

Vecco, Marilena. “A Definition of Cultural Heritage: From
the  Tangible  to  The  Intangible”.  Journal  of  Cultural
Heritage 11 (2010): 321–324.

Venturi, Robert. Complexity and Contradiction in Archi-
tecture. New York: Museum of Modern Art Papers on
Architecture Press, 1966.

Butina-Watson,  Georgia  and  Bentley,  Ian.  Identity  by
Design. London: Elsevier Publishing, 2007.

Whalen,  Robert.    Sacred  Spring:  God  and  the  Birth  of
Modernism in Fin de Siècle Vienna. Michigan: Wm. B.
Eerdmans Publishing, 2007.

Zevi, Bruno. Modern Language of Architecture. Canberra:
Australian National University Press, 1978.

Notes

1        Council of Europe Framework Convention on Value
of Cultural Heritage for Society. Council of Europe Treaty
Series, no. 199, 2005.

2        Georgia Butina-Watson and Ian Bentley, Identity by
Design, (London: Elsevier Publishing, 2007), 32.

3        Mari Sundli Tveit, Åsa Ode Sang and Gary Fry, “Key
Concepts in a Framework for Analysing Visual Landscape
Character”,  Journal  of  Landscape  Research  31  (2006):
229–255.

4        Hilde   Heynen,   “What   Belongs   to   Architecture?
Avant-garde Ideas in the Modern Movement, Journal of
Architecture 4 (1999): 129–147.

5        Laurajane Smith, Uses of Heritage, (Oxford: Routledge
Press, 2006), 20.

6        Anna   Góral,   “Cultural   Heritage   in   the   Cobweb
of  Meanings”,  Heritage  2014  –  Proceedings  of  the  4th
International  Conference  on  Heritage  and  Sustainable
Development, (Barcelos, Green Lines Institute, 2014)

7        Alos Riegl, The Modern Cult of Monuments: Its Essence
and Its Development (Wien: K. K. Zentral-Kommission für
Kunst- und Historische Denkmale: Braumüller, 1903), 71.

8        Lisanne   Gibson,   Valuing   Historical   Environments,
(Ashgate Publishing, 2009), 2.

9        L.   Harald   Freidheim   and   Manal   Khalaf,   “The
Significance   of   Values:   Heritage   Value   Typologies

Re-examined”, International Journal of Heritage Studies 26              77

(2016): 466–481.

10      Janet  Stephenson,  “The  Cultural  Values  Model:  An
Integrated Approach to Values in Landscapes”, Journal of
Landscape and Urban Planning 84 (2008): 127–139.

11      Miriam    Gusevich,    “Purity    and    Transgression:
Reflection on the Architectural Avantgarde’s Rejection of
Kitsch”, Discourse 1 (1988): 90–115.

12      Bruno   Zevi,   Modern   Language   of   Architecture,
(Australian National University Press, 1978), 3.

13      Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, (London:
John Rodker Publisher, 1931), 2.

14      William  Richard  Eric  Tozer,  A  Theory  of  Making:
Architecture and Art in the Practice of Adolf Loos, (PhD
diss., University College London, 2011)

15      Website of Adolf Loos Apartment and Gallery, Villa
Müller, accessed: October, 2019, https://adolfloos.cz/en/
villa-muller

16      Jan  Michl,  “The  Modernist  Idea  of  Architecture”
(paper   presented   at   Plymouth   University   School   of
Architecture, April 7, 2011)

17      Leonardo Benevolo, History of Modern Architecture,
(Massachusetts: M.I.T Press, 1989), 494.

18      Fabio Carrera, “Is the Lamp of Memory still burning?
Memory  in  Architecture  and  in  Urban  Design.”  (MIT:
Department of Urban Studies and Planning, 1998)

19      Robert  Venturi,  Complexity  and  Contradiction  in
Architecture,  (The  Museum  of  Modern  Art  Papers  on
Architecture Press,1966), 16.

20      Nikos Salingaros, A Theory of Architecture, (Solingen:
Umbau-Verlag Harald Puschel Press, 2006), 220.

21      Jürgen  Habermas,  The   Philosophical   Discourse   of
Modernity, (Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1987), 4.

22      Walter Gropius, Internationale Architektur, (Munich:
Albert Lange Press, 1925), 7.

23      Henry-Russell  Hitchcock,  International  Style.  (New
York: Norton Press, 1966), 36.

24      Nicos Salingaros, 222.

25      Jonathan  Richards,  Façadism,  (Oxford:  Routledge
Press, 1994), vii.

26      Kenneth  Frampton,  Modern  Architecture:  A  Critical
History, (Thames and Hudson Press, 1992), 9.

27      Robert Whalen, Sacred Spring: God and the Birth of
Modernism  in  Fin  de  Siècle  Vienna,  (Wm.  B.  Eerdmans
Publishing, 2007), 166.

28      Coast  Modern  is  an  independent  documentary  by
directors Mike Bernard and Gavin Froome produced by
Twofold Films in 2012.

29      Robert Campbell, “Why Don’t the Rest of Us Like the
Buildings the Architects Like?”, Bulletin of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences 57 (2004): 22–25.

30      Matthew Rampley, Heritage, Ideology and Identity in
Central and Eastern Europe, (The Boydell Press, 2012), 6.

31      Le Corbusier, 3.

32      Georg Mörsch, Das Neue Bauen als Herausforderung
an die Denkmalpflege, (Unsere Kunst-denkmaeler, 1990), 5.


33      Gerhard   Hoffmann,   From   Modernism   to   Post-
Modernism:   Concepts   and   Strategies   of   Post-Modern
American Fiction, (Rodopi Press, 2005), 38.

34      Alan    Cunningham,    Modern    Movement    Heritage,
DOCOMOMO, (London: E&FN Spon Publishing, 1998), 10.

35      Huriye  Armağan  Doğan.  “Implementation  of  eye-
tracking  technology  on  cultural  heritage  research  and

78           practice”, Journal of Creativity Games, 7 (2019): 16–21.

36      Bradley  T.  Carmichael,  “When  Modern  Becomes
Historic:  Preserving  the  Modernist  Building  Envelope”,
Journal of Building Design + Construction, (2012): 40–46.

37      Wessel de Jonge, “Sustainable Renewal of the Everyday
Modern”, Journal of Architectural Conservation 23 (2017):
62–105.

Huriye ARMAĞAN Doğan

Architektūros ir statybos institutas, Kauno technologijos universitetas, 
Kaunas, Lietuva

MODERNIZMO PERCEPCIJA ARCHITEKTŪROJE, KAIP KULTŪROS
PAVELDE

Santrauka

Kai, atsižvelgiant į visuomenės suvokimą, abejojama kultūros paveldo apibrėžimu 
architektūroje, rezultatai rodo,
jog žmonės kultūros paveldą identifikuoja kaip dvasinius ir materialinius 
praeities pasiekimus bei tapatybės atvaiz-
dą, kuris siejamas su istoriniais paminklais. Taip pat daugeliu atvejų 
skirtumas tarp paminklo ir kultūros paveldo
apibrėžimų visuomenei nėra aiškus. Dėl šių priežasčių kultūros paveldo 
vertinimas išsaugojimo procesą dažnai pa-
lieka šešėlyje. Tai ypač pastebima modernizmo architektūros atveju. Ekspertai 
modernizmo artefaktus pripažįsta
kaip kultūros paveldą, tačiau ne ekspertų nuomonė dažnu atveju išsiskiria. Tai 
turi įtakos, jog visuomenė tinkamai
neįvertina modernizmo architektūros kaip paveldo ir kaip artefakto vertės. 
Šiame straipsnyje siekiama analizuoti
priežastis, kurios nulemia nykstantį modernizmo paveldo vertės suvokimą tiek 
literatūroje, tiek atliekamuose tyri-
muose. Taip pat straipsnyje pristatomi veiksmai, kurie galėtų prisidėti prie 
modernizmo paveldo išsaugojimo.

Reikšminiai žodžiai: modernizmas, percepcija, paveldas, strategija, vertė.

Gauta: 2020-01-17

Parengta spaudai:  2020-05-05

Huriye Armağan DOĞAN

Institute of Architecture and Construction, Kaunas University of Technology, 
Kaunas, Lithuania
Huriye Armağan Doğan is an MSc. Architect whose specialism is Restoration and 
Conservation of
Cultural Heritage. She finished her Bachelor’s study in 2008, and Master’s 
study in 2011. Currently, she
is        a PhD and junior researcher at Kaunas University of Technology. Her 
research interests are
Adaptive Re-use, Preservation and Perception of Cultural Heritage, Modern 
Movement,

Early 20th  Century Architecture, Conservation, Cultural Memory.

E-mail: armagan.dogan@gmail.com

