Article

Potentials and Limitations of
Mobile Eye Tracking in Visitor
Studies: Evidence From Field
Research at Two Museum
Exhibitions in Germany

Kira Eghbal-Azar1 and Thomas Widlok2

Social Science Computer Review
31(1) 103-118
ª The Author(s) 2013
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0894439312453565
sscr.sagepub.com

Abstract
The main goal of this article is to demonstrate the potentials and limitations of mobile eye tracking
(MET) in visitor studies and other social science research. We provide empirical examples of MET
research in the context of a comparative study of two exhibitions at two museums in Germany. The
article underlines the potentials of MET in combination with other methods and in comparison with
conventional forms of observation and interviewing. On the basis of our case material we provide
recommendations for social scientists who consider integrating mobile eye-tracking in their field
research.

Keywords
cognitive science, mobile eye tracking, observation, visitor studies, field research

Introduction: Background and Characterization of Mobile Eye-Tracking

One goal of this article is to demonstrate the potentials and limitations of mobile eye tracking (MET)
in museum visitor studies. Another goal is to provide empirical examples of visitor research and
draw some conclusions about the potentials and limitations for future prospects of MET in museum
visitor studies and in social science field research more generally. Thereby we hope to put anthro-
pologists and other social scientists engaged in field research into the position to make an informed
decision as to whether and how they may apply MET technology in their future research. We provide
background information on the available MET tools and what is required to make good use of MET
in field research. We then discuss the potentials and limitations of MET for visitor studies, first in
general and second in terms of our own study at two museum exhibitions in Germany. We present
MET results that provide us with an inventory of visitors’ scan patterns that can be used in a

1 Knowledge Media Research Center, Tuebingen, Germany
2 Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands, and University of Cologne, Germany

Corresponding Author:
Kira Eghbal-Azar, Knowledge Media Research Center (KMRC) Tuebingen, Schleichstraße 6 D-72076 Tuebingen, Germany.
Email: k.eghbal-azar@iwm-kmrc.de

104

Social Science Computer Review 31(1)

bottom-up fashion to construct a ‘‘script’’ or ‘‘schema’’, in this case of museum exhibition visits but
with potentially wider applications. We conclude by suggesting MET as a complementary tool for
social science research on culture and cognition.

As a first step toward understanding MET technology and the kind of data that it provides, some
background knowledge about visual perception in action is essential. The way we perceive things
visually differs depending on the context, for instance when being seated in an armchair reading a book
or when sitting in front of a screen watching videos or looking at images - or when strolling through a
museum gallery. Seeing things while being involved in bodily action involves more parts of the brain
than in a position of rest, and it is connected especially to the ‘‘executive’’ of our ‘‘working memory’’
(Baddeley, 2007) and to our procedural long-term memory (Land & Tatler, 2009).1 The implicit or
procedural knowledge involved in visual perception in action is stored in schemata/scripts and is in
a great measure unconscious in nature so that agents themselves find it hard to verbalize and manip-
ulate their behavior (Land & Tatler, 2009; cf. Schank & Abelson, 1977 about scripts).

The discussion of visual perception relies on three important technical terms which are also
important for our assessment of MET, namely ‘‘fixations,’’ ‘‘saccades,’’ and ‘‘scan patterns’’. Our
vision consists of so-called eye movement patterns or scan patterns or gaze patterns that are made
of combined ‘‘saccade and fixate’’ strategies. Fixations can be explained as very short ‘‘stops’’ of
eye movements indicating that attention is being resided somehow. Saccades are very rapid eye
movements between fixations that are done spontaneously and that can vary in duration. During
saccades we can hardly perceive anything, we are basically ‘‘blind.’’ Hence, eye movements are
not done smoothly but in an apparently zigzag fashion that seem to be done very unsystematically
at first (Land & Tatler, 2009). Eye-tracking technology records these movements and it is the first
task of MET data analysis to distinguish fixations from saccades and then to investigate correla-
tions between the observed patterns, meanings and the goals of attention (cf. Holmqvist, Nystro¨m,
Andersson, Dewhurst, Jarodzka, & van de Weijer, 2011).

Whereas stationary eye trackers require participants to be seated in front of a screen, METs can be
mounted on the participants’ head while they move around freely engaging in various tasks. There are
a number of head-mounted eye tracking devices available. We have used the ASL MobileEye and the
Locarna PT Mini (see below) but many of the following points refer to MET technology in general.
All of these devices generally work with two cameras (see Figure 1): a scene camera that records
the scene and the environment from the participant’s perspective and an eye camera that records his
or her eye movements using harmless infrared lights, the so-called dark pupil tracking. The two cam-
eras are mounted on frames of a pair of eyeglasses but most devices only record one eye of the par-
ticipant. These glasses sometimes are mounted on a cap or even on a helmet. As Figure 1 shows,
most devices today still need to be fixed in a very stable manner on the participants’ head. However,
the current trend is to produce MET devices that are worn like regular glasses by the participant and
that can track both eyes (so-called binocular eye-tracking) which reduces the parallax error of our
two-eyed vision that is more pronounced when relying on MET technology that tracks only one eye
(cf. www.eyetracking-glasses.com or http://www.tobii.com/en/analysis-and-research/global/ and cf.
Holmqvist et al., 2011, p. 60 for parallax error).

Since both separately recorded videos have to be brought together and processed into a single
video by a computer after recording has taken place, the calibration of the cameras is essential. What
processing does is to synchronize the two recordings so that we receive a single video with a marker
(a fixation cross or circle) that is permanently shown while we watch the recorded scene from the
participant’s perspective. This video indicates eye movements in action based on the eye camera
together with the picture of the three-dimensional space through which the participant has moved
(cf. Mayr, Knipfer, & Wessel, 2009 and the manuals of MET devices). This process makes MET
rather complex to use in field research, making some preparatory training with this technology nec-
essary (Holmqvist et al., 2011, p. v-vi, 1).2

Eghbal-Azar and Widlok

105

Figure 1. Calibration of a mobile eye tracker (photo: Kira Eghbal-Azar).

One of the reasons why eye tracking has not yet played a role in the social sciences is that in its
stationary version it requires a typical experiment-like setting, cutting out the social context and
the context of agency. With MET becoming more readily available, this limitation is less severe
today.3 We therefore suggest MET as a new feasible method for social scientists conducting field
research, but we are also aware that a number of problems still remain that researchers need to take
account of.

Pros and Cons of Mobile Eye Tracking Technology in the Context of
Visitor Studies

In their summary of visitor studies methodology Yalowitz and Bronnenkant (2009) are expressing
the dominant view when they stress that the main method regarding visitor studies is still observa-
tion, no matter how observation data are collected: e.g. by the paper-and-pencil technique or through
videotaping or other tracking technologies.4 The same probably holds more generally since many
social scientists, especially anthropologists, who are conducting field research all over the world,
continue to apply the paper-and-pencil technique for observation in the field. We do not expect that
MET technology will completely replace these other forms of observation but that it will be com-
plementary - in what ways remains to be seen.

Mayr et al. (2009) provide a pioneering exploratory MET study with ‘‘first insights into informal
learning in museums’’ (p. 195.). However, they neglect that visitors are not simply ‘‘integrating
information that is spatially distributed’’ (p. 190.) but are engaged in what could be called ‘‘appro-
priating’’ the exhibition. Appropriating exhibitions means that visitors are not only gathering infor-
mation but are also actively looking for an emotional and aesthetical experience (Hein, 2000) in a
particular social setting (Falk, Koran, & Dierking, 1986), a point to which we shall return below. In
their summary Mayr et al. (2009) list four potentials of MET as a recording device (p. 196-197.)
which can be taken as a useful point of departure:

106

Social Science Computer Review 31(1)

Figure 2. Mobile eye tracking (MET) study at the Linden-Museum Stuttgart ‘‘Pacific Oases’’ exhibition (photo:
Kira Eghbal-Azar).

1.

‘‘Data richness’’ through the inclusion of information about the environment (e.g., other visitors
present, the visibility, or approachability of objects and media).

2. High external ‘‘data validity’’ because data are recorded ‘‘objectively’’ by cameras (p. 196),
reducing perspective errors and providing more ecological validity due to applicability in nat-
ural settings.

3. Providing a ‘‘nonreactive measurement,’’ because eye movements can hardly be manipulated
due to its unconsciousness (see above) so that it can be usefully related independently to con-
scious reflection (see below).

4. Allowing statistical analysis, depending on the sample size and research question.

Mayr et al. (2009) then go on to list eight limitations of MET (pp. 198–200):

1. No recording of ‘‘covert attention and mental spotlight’’ since eye fixations per se do not tell us

anything about the goal of the visitor’s attention.

2. Only ‘‘limited conclusions about cognitive processing’’ are possible because the conclusions
that we arrive at through MET are typically ‘‘interpretations of eye-tracking data that are often
based on assumptions and heuristics about underlying cognitive processes’’ (p. 198).

3. Some ‘‘obtrusiveness of measurement’’ as data might be distorted because visitors are aware of

4.

5.

being evaluated by the MET or are simply irritated by wearing it.
‘‘Selective sampling’’ in the sense that not everyone can wear an MET device since visitors with
corneal dysfunctions (that prohibit reflections of the infrared lights) or who wear regular glasses
are disqualified (Since then devices have become available, e.g., from Locarna, that allow wear-
ing regular glasses in addition to the eye tracker).
‘‘Limited temporal and spatial accuracy’’: There is (currently) a time limitation due to the
temporal resolution of eye trackers that has to be divided for the recording of two videos at
the same time (hence 50 Hz in fact mean 25 Hz), so that very short fixations might be

Expert
Expert
Expert
Expert
Novice
Novice
Novice
Novice

Expert
Expert
Expert
Expert
Novice
Novice
Novice
Novice

Eghbal-Azar and Widlok

107

Table 1. Sample of the Mobile Eye Tracking (MET) Study at the Linden-Museum Stuttgart ‘‘Pacific Oasis’’
Exhibition: Visitors’ Social Data.

Visitor Category

Gender

Age

Profession

Male
Female
Female
Female
Male
Male
Male
Female

25
24
24
24
36
29
25
19

Student of cultural anthropology
Student of cultural anthropology
Student of cultural anthropology
Student of cultural anthropology
Mechanical engineer
Student of English philology
Student of technology management
Student of linguistics

Table 2. Sample of the Mobile Eye Tracking (MET) Study at the LiMo ‘‘Nexus’’ Exhibition in Marbach: Visitors’
Social Data.

Visitor Category

Gender

Age

Profession

Male
Female
Male
Male
Female
Male
Male
Male

23
24
27
24
23
43
24
32

Teacher trainee for German
Teacher trainee for German
Master degree in German studies
Student of philology
Student of Roman philology and history
Technician for machine tools
Student of software engineering
Student of philosophy and industrial mechanic

missed. If distances between the visitor and objects often differ from the calibrated distance
the spatial accuracy is not given at all times (p. 199; the parallax error, see above). Like
every single lens camera the scene camera only records one part of the world and is more
limited than our vision.
‘‘Laborious data analysis’’ is required because data analysis has still to be done largely manually
by the researcher due to the mobile setting that allows visitors to walk individually through gal-
leries so that the stimuli and scenes change all the time.5

6.

7. Costs: METs are very expensive (each of the devices we used in our study costs around 25 000

Euro, binocular mobile eye-trackers are currently sold at around 40.000 Euro).

8. New ‘‘ethical concerns’’: Because participants can hardly manipulate or hide their eye move-
ments, a point that has to be included in procedures of consent and at the same time this is one
of the important assets of this technology.

In conclusion, Mayr et al. (2009) suggest combining MET with other methods such as interviews,
questionnaires, or verbal reports to gain valid interpretations of scan patterns. One of the reasons
why MET needs to be combined with other methods is that the marker (based on the eye camera)
that is permanently shown in the processed MET video data cannot be equalized all the time with
actual attention to the object or scene captured by the scene camera. While past research assumed
a strong ‘‘eye-mind hypothesis’’ (Just & Carpenter, 1980) as if eye movements would provide a
direct insight into cognition, current research does not assume that we can draw simple conclusions
from fixations and scan patterns to the goals of attention and to the underlying cognitive processes
(Mayr et al., 2009; Land & Tatler, 2009). Complementary to MET there are three different kinds of
verbal reportings which may be selected according to the research question or the task at hand and

Social Science Computer Review 31(1)

108

Tasks

Table 3. Estimated Time Effort for Preparing and Analyzing the Mass of Data.

Details

Total time (min)a

Transcription of all reports

10 min transcription time for one min

Connecting all audio recording of reporting

Approx. 30 min for one video

audio recording

with corresponding MET videos

(estimated)b,e

MET manual data analysis without audio

Estimated 1 min recording ¼ 5–20 min

4420–17,680

MET manual analysis with audio (estimated)c,e

Estimated 1 min recording ¼ 10–25 min

8,650–21,625

Transcription of all interviews

10 min transcription time for 1 min

8,650

480

3,460

540

Estimated time requirement for preparing

Corresponds to 11-22 weeks of full-

26,200–52,435

manual data analysis

manual data analysis

audio recording

time work

Connecting all interviews with

corresponding questionnaires

data for analysis and analyzing all
16 videos with and without audio
completely on the microleveld

Note. aData analysis is not yet fully completed. Results mentioned in this article are preliminary results to provide potentials of
MET.
bCalculation based on MET recording.
cCalculation based on audio recordings of cued retrospective reporting.
dMicrolevel ¼ all 10 distinct scan patterns that have been found exemplarily in both MET studies so far. Time requirement
excluding needed breaks during manual data analysis and excluding analysis of Interview/questionnaires.
eData analysis of MET data depends on visitors’ behavior, level of analysis, number of displayed exhibits, and given information
in the exhibition, size of the exhibition area, kind of analysis (with or without audio), and the experience of the researcher.
These time efforts are estimations because the 16 tests are not yet fully analyzed. The preliminary results mentioned in this
article are based on manual video data analysis concerning systematic, repeating, and eye-catching scan patterns.

with respect to the relevant memory system. These are concurrent, retrospective or cued retrospec-
tive reporting (cf. van Gog, Paas, van Merrienboer, & Witte, 2005; van Someren, Barnard, &
Sandberg, 1994; Ericsson & Simon, 1993):

—Concurrent reporting means verbal reporting while doing a particular task.
—Retrospective reporting means verbal reporting in retrospection after completing the task.
—Cued retrospective reporting means verbal reporting after completing a particular task with a

cue, in this case typically while watching the processed recording.6

In our own study, described in more detail below, we have chosen for cued retrospective reporting
since it promises to lead to more exact and controlled results as the given cue (a processed eye track-
ing video) triggers more exact memories which would otherwise be constructed without the assis-
tance of a cue (cf. van Gog et al., 2005).

Mobile Eye-Tracking in the Field: Two Exhibitions at Two Museums as a
Comparative Test Case

The potentials and limitations outlined above were arrived at through a single study that consisted of
an exhibition set up solely for the purposes of exploring MET with three participants (Mayr et al.,
2009). We now report on research in two settings that were natural in the sense that the two com-
parative case studies were carried out at museums with regular exhibitions that were set up by cura-
tors with a conventional training in their field for just plain visitors who frequent these museums.

Eghbal-Azar and Widlok

109

Table 4. Time Effort Conducting the Two Comparative Mobile Eye Tracking (MET) Studies.

Tasks (chronologically)

Details

Total time (Min)

Test setups at the museums
Calibrations
MET recordings

60 min/test
Varied from 5 min to 30 min (including breaks)
Varied from 12 min 52 sec to 1 hr 16 min 30

sec (excluding breaks)
Equates appr. recording time

MET data processings
Cued retrospective reportinga
(separate audio recording)
Interviewsb
Removals of test setups at the museum 60 min/test
Time requirement for the 16 tests
Time schedule for data collectionc

One day of work for each test

960
240
884

884

865
346
960
5,139
16 days

Note. aPure reporting time without preparation and instruction time. Differentiates from MET recording time due to time
spent in exhibition and time spent reporting.
bStandardized interviews based on a questionnaire with open and closed questions. These interviews have been recorded
completely. Closed questions had been documented on the questionnaires as well.
cNote that five tests did not work out due to technical issues. So in fact data collection took much longer to get the complete
sample size of n ¼ 16.

Putting the MET at work in these ‘‘wild’’ conditions is a more realistic test case of this tool for inter-
ested field researchers. The results that constitute our empirical examples are preliminary as they
await full analysis in a forthcoming PhD thesis (Eghbal-Azar, forthcoming). The two exhibitions
concerned were the temporary exhibition: ‘‘Pacific Oases: Living and Surviving in the West
Pacific’’ (at the Linden-Museum Stuttgart, Figure 2, cf. Heermann, 2009) and the permanent exhi-
bition: ‘‘nexus’’ at the Museum of Modern Literature (LiMo) in Marbach (cf. Gfrereis, 2009). The
overall project covers a broad range of issues to do with the distinction of the culturally close (mod-
ern German literature in Marbach) and the culturally distant (Pacific ethnography in Stuttgart) with
regard to the visitors who are resident in Germany. Other issues of comparison concern the modes of
the exhibitions (temporary versus permanent exhibition) and particular presentation styles of dis-
playing objects and modes of implementing the use of various digital and non-digital media in cor-
respondence with the particular intentions of the curators. Furthermore the two exhibitions are
placed in institutions that are very different in terms of their histories and buildings (old versus
newly established) and with regard to their subject matter. Despite these differences there is one
common feature that is very relevant in the context of MET studies, namely that both exhibitions
do not suggest a single or main pathway for visitors.

Two different eye trackers were used in the two exhibitions: We applied the ASL MobileEye eye
tracker (designed 2004; http://www.asleyetracking.com/Site/Products/MobileEye/tabid/70/Default.
aspx) for the MET study at the Linden-Museum Stuttgart (see Figure 2) and the Locarna PT Mini
(designed 2010; http://www.locarna.com/products.html) at the LiMo in Marbach. Our sample size
was eight visitors in each of both MET studies (n ¼ 16 in sum). These were in each case four
‘‘experts’’ (visitors with prior knowledge of the subject matter, e.g., students of German studies
or cultural anthropology) and four ‘‘novices’’ (with only cursory or even no prior knowledge of the
subject matter). At this stage we have not yet fully analyzed differences between ‘‘experts’’ and
‘‘novices’’. As far as the authors know, these two comparative MET studies to date had the largest
sample size for examining regular exhibitions applying MET technology. For more information
about both samples see Tables 1 and 2.

All visitors had been first-time visitors to the exhibitions and had no prior knowledge about
these exhibitions or how to navigate through them. We applied MET in both cases in an

110

Social Science Computer Review 31(1)

exploratory fashion, to help documenting and analyzing the scan patterns of visitors, i.e. what vis-
itors ‘‘really viewed’’ as they moved freely through the exhibition. According to Land & Tatler
(2009, p. 41) ‘‘free-viewing’’ allows the visitor ‘‘to select their own high-level approaches to look-
ing at scenes’’. Consequently, by recording free viewing as detailed as possible we were aiming to
find their implicit scripts and strategies or what one may consider their natural, habitual way of
appropriating exhibitions. All visitors got the following open and standardized instruction for their
exhibition visit after calibrating the MET: ‘‘Please view the exhibition naturally at your own
speed, following your own wishes and needs. There are no further specifications, even no time
specification on how to carry out this visit. Your knowledge acquisition about the exhibition will
not be tested afterwards’’.

Since we wanted to find out what the visitors actually attended to during their visit we used cued
retrospective reporting to elicit their goals of attention, avoiding priming effects as much as possible.
After the exhibition visit all visitors were asked to watch their own processed eye-tracking video and
to verbalize with this cue in retrospection. At that stage, we gave the following standardized instruc-
tion: ‘‘Now I present you the video recorded by the MET during your visit of the exhibition. While
watching the video, please describe spontaneously what you viewed, perceived, thought and felt at
various points and what you paid attention to.’’ We also conducted interviews directly after the
reporting.7

The figures we provide give an overview about the procedure, the time effort for conducting and
analyzing these MET studies and the mass of data that even such a small sample produces (see
Tables 3 and 4).

Mayr et al. (2009, see above) listed twice as many limitations than potentials of MET for
visitor studies. The first lesson suggested by our examples is that it is worthwhile to first dis-
cuss the actual qualities of MET potentials before starting to compare potentials and limitations
by counting them. What are, in fact, the benefits of applying MET in our research? After all,
the costs (time, money, energy) are considerable. Is MET really worth doing? If MET as an
objective measurement cannot measure aesthetical experiences, as it has been criticized
(Kaube, 2010), why bother?

Here are some details of our research that speak to these broad questions:

Eye movements in action are very rapid (Land, & Tatler, 2009). For example, a sequence of one
visit to the literature exhibition that lasted about 10 sec included no less than eight distinct scan pat-
terns that the MET recorded! There is no way that applying conventional observation methods could
record such a large number of rapid changing behavioral patterns in such a detailed manner over a
long period. The observer is likely to miss out some patterns because observation depends on the
acute awareness of the observer (with no rewind option). By contrast, exploratory MET data can
be stored and then analysed repeatedly.

Detail 1:

Detail 2:

In conventional observation, head and body movements can be treated as a proxy for scan pat-
terns, but there are eye movements that are done without moving the head or the rest of the body
which do show up in the MET record but which otherwise would remain undetected (cf. Mayr
et al., 2009). For example, we observed an ‘‘alternating gaze’’ between two tiny exhibits that are
positioned very close to each other so that the visitor does not even have to move his or her head
but only the eyes.8 Without MET these gazes would be undetected because there are no indicators
from which an observer could conclude the visitors’ gaze.

Eghbal-Azar and Widlok

Detail 3:

111

Conditions in the museum gallery can make observation difficult or even impossible due to an
obstructed view caused by the particular style of the presentation or simply by too many other vis-
itors being in the way, by light reflections or by relative darkness. At the LiMo, this forced us to drop
conventional observations at the level of objects in close proximity within the showcases in favour of
the larger scale only, while the MET allowed us to include the participants’ perspective at all levels.
The often unpredictable and uncontrollable obstructions that make conventional observation diffi-
cult were bypassed applying MET.

Detail 4:

Even when eye movements can be observed, fixations never can due to their very nature (cf. Mayr
et al. 2009). In the example given earlier in Detail 1, eight fixations were made within 10 sec. Two of
these eight fixations were directed at a pistol that was exhibited. While these fixations indicate that
attention is being arrested, we still do not know the goal of attention and the reasons for paying atten-
tion until we combine MET data with other methods. MET therefore also serves a function as an
exploratory tool and not just as a tool for quantifying observations and for testing assumptions as
might be expected. It does not exclude other approaches to aesthetical experiences but it may com-
plement them in interesting ways.

Implication of Mobile Eye Tracking Data for Current Controversies in
Visitor Studies

From these details we may draw some intermediate conclusions, the most important one being the
need for combining MET with other methods. These combinations may be similar to what Mayr
et al. (2009) suggest but other, additional ideas for further possible combinations emerge from our
case material. On the basis of these empirical examples, we may revisit the issue of MET
potentials.9

Firstly, equipped with MET data we may reconsider some of the unresolved controversies in visi-
tor studies. For instance, can we equate stopping or the time spend looking at an exhibit with attend-
ing to this exhibit (Serell, 1997; Yalowitz & Bronnenkant, 2009)? The visitor who had given
attention to the pistol (note it is the only pistol displayed in the literature exhibition) not only spent
time viewing it and fixating it but also reported on it afterwards. However, there were many other
exhibits that this visitor viewed much longer but without reporting on them. By applying MET we
might be able to conclude that more quantity (length of time and number of stops) that we spend
looking at exhibits, or more generally at exhibitions for that matter, do not necessarily translate into
a qualitative difference - as Serell (1997) and other visitor researchers seem to assume. Serell (1997)
found out that most visitors only spend about 20 minutes at an exhibition and only view one third of
the displayed objects. There is a considerable amount of empirical research about visitors’ move-
ment patterns in exhibitions that has been carried out since the beginning of tracking studies (without
applying MET). The results are partially contradictory. One attempt to deal with these contradictory
results in terms of underlying universal principles is the general value principle that assumes that
visitors are ‘‘saving steps’’ (Bitgood, 2006). In other words, the assumption is that visitors walk
as little as necessary in order to minimize their costs for getting more value from their visit. Since
they do not have control over the benefits offered in exhibitions (i.e. the design of the exhibition and
the level of information provided) they concentrate on their ‘‘costs’’ in order to arrive at an optimal
visit (Bitgood, 2006 and Rounds, 2004). Unfortunately, ‘saving steps’ as a principle cannot explain
every phenomenon encountered in exhibitions. Moreover, it does not account for the most important

112

Social Science Computer Review 31(1)

and distinguishing feature that characterizes a museum exhibition visit in comparison to other forms
of information gathering: The classical way of appropriating exhibitions compared to watching a
movie or reading a book is ‘‘strolling and viewing’’ (‘‘gehen und sehen’’ Korff & Thiemeyer,
2008, p. 137; cf. Korff, 2003), i. e. the ability to go off and to explore in multiple possible ways and
from a number of perspectives. This is what makes museum exhibition visits such a unique experi-
ence and arguably this is the main attraction that museums hold. The agendas that we have set for
ourselves during a visit and that influence our attention (Falk, Moussouri, & Coulson, 1998) may
override the time that we devote to a particular object and the ‘‘cost’’ factor more generally. Discuss-
ing alternative explanations of visitor behaviour has a much better basis once we have good data on
both, the time spent on particular objects, the fixations that go with an exhibition visit and other data
from other sources - allowing for a triangulation of methods as George E. Hein (1998, p. 75.)
proposed it long ago.

Secondly, with MET data we may also contribute more specifically to the debate as to whether
there is an underlying universal principle that explains the behavior of visitors and whether it con-
sists of the type of behavioural rules that have been suggested (cf. Bitgood, 2006 and Rounds, 2004).
In other words, we can discuss whether there is an ‘‘exhibition visit script’’ - as one may want to call
it - for appropriating and experiencing exhibitions. On the basis of MET data we suggest that it is
possible to reconstruct this script ‘‘bottom-up’’ by looking at distinct scan patterns that may form
a repertoire of subscripts from which visitors draw as they combine these subscripts for their com-
plex navigation strategies that help them to successfully meet the goals and agendas at the superor-
dinate level (cf. Holmquist et al., 2011 and cf. Falk et al., 1998). MET data thereby allows us to flesh
out the presumed script and add substance to the assumption that exhibition visits are guided by
scripts.

On the basis of some preliminary, manual analysis of MET videos recorded in the ‘‘Pacific
Oasis’’ exhibition, we were able to compile a list of systematic and repetitive behavioral patterns
that may be considered distinctive key elements of an ‘‘exhibition visit script’’. So far, this list con-
sists of 14 scan patterns (scanning the objects and scenes displayed) that we have observed,
described, labeled and classified (cf. Holmquist et al. 2011, p. 253-285 on the theory of scanpaths).
However, this list is probably incomplete and it is likely that in further analysis other scan patterns
will emerge or that closely associated scan patterns will be bundled together. Twelve of these 14
scan patterns were operationalized for quantitative analysis so that we were able to successfully dou-
ble check them with systematic conventional observation at the level of the nine selected sections
within the ‘‘Pacific Oases’’ exhibition at Stuttgart. This in turn allows us to claim that there is some
robustness of this list across different methods of observation. Ten out of these 12 patterns were also
evident in the MET data recorded in the ‘‘nexus’’ exhibition at Marbach. This is remarkable because
these two exhibitions are very different in many respects so that it is not trivial to ask whether there is
a similar script at work in visits to these two exhibitions.

On the basis of our preliminary data, we can now safely assume that at least these 10 distinctive
scan patterns are very frequent in the way that visitors appropriate and experience exhibitions. They
are good candidates for being part of the larger, general ‘‘exhibition visit script’’ that researchers
have long assumed to be at work without having the detailed record to show what it consists of.

Some of the above mentioned scan patterns appear to be particularly representative for the prac-
tices of ‘‘looking and acting’’ (Land & Tatler, 2009) or ‘‘gehen und sehen’’ (strolling and viewing;
Korff & Thiemeyer, 2008) in a three-dimensional gallery space. For the purposes of our discus-
sion, here a few examples will suffice:

Changing perspective: We define this pattern as sequentially and systematically viewing an
exhibit from a number of different vantage points or perspectives, a characteristic feature
front side/back side) of an
that

the three-dimensional space (right/left, up/down,

Eghbal-Azar and Widlok

113

exhibition allows. For this scan pattern, visitors also have to move their head and some-
times even their body. This provides us with indicators that are more readily observable.
There are typical indicators from the cued retrospective response that go together with the
visitor doing a ‘‘change of perspective’’, e.g. visitor statements such as wanting to know
‘‘how this mask was put up’’ on the wall.

Insight: We define this as looking inside an object (not necessarily from above). To realize this
‘‘insight’’ visitors have to move closer to the exhibits first with their body and second with their
head before they can gain a look inside. For example ‘‘insights’’ were often recorded when vis-
itors approached the men’s house model from Palau that was part of the ‘‘Pacific Oases’’ exhi-
bition. One participant reported about the specific characteristics of its floor structure that was
only visible when taking the ‘‘insight’’, providing matching verbal evidence that an ‘‘insight’’
took place.

Backward gaze: Following Mayr et al. (2009) we define this pattern, typically part of an initial
(‘‘selection of information and visual research’’, p. 195) orientation in a gallery space, as one
that visitors employ to orientate themselves again after viewing a gallery as they gaze back-
wards before they leave a gallery. This includes at least a combined eye and head movement
and sometimes even an eye-head-body movement (cf. Holmqvist et al., 2011, pp. 264-265 for a
comparable event also called look-back, return or refixation).

Social gaze: We define this pattern as a gaze directed toward other persons in the environ-
ment. Sometimes a ‘‘social gaze’’ only consists of an eye-movement but mostly it is a
combined eye and head movement and sometimes even an eye-head-body movement.
When visitors reported that they felt affected by staff or foreign visitors like school
classes (their closeness or noise) they often changed their direction and moved away.
Sometimes this report was accompanied by a ‘‘social gaze’’ which underlines that social
factors, and other senses such as hearing, are also influencing visitors’ movement patterns
and not only the visual affordances of the displayed objects or the presentation style.

Thirdly, we note that an ‘‘exhibition visit script’’, whatever its particular form, is not made up of a
collection of gazes and scan patterns alone. Rather, we suggest that this may be an example of what
Hutchins (1995) has called ‘‘distributed cognition’’ since it involves aspects of the materialized exhi-
bition, above all the ‘‘affordances’’ of objects that allow insights or of the exhibition structures that
channelize ‘‘social gazes’’ in a certain way (cf. Gibson, 1986, pp. 127-143). Building on the earlier
work by Mayr et al. (2009), Eghbal-Azar (forthcoming) aims to provide a first comprehensive gen-
eric classification of museum visitors’ eye movement patterns connected to affordances in exhibi-
tions based on mobile eye-tracking that is lacking so far. The observed scan patterns are of
course not limited to exhibitions but form a subsection of a larger repertoire of scan patterns used
in everyday life. The ‘‘exhibition visit script’’ would denote a particular bundle, sequence and fre-
quency of scan patterns. Similarly the scan patterns are related to expectations (some personal,
others publicly debated) of what there is to see in an exhibition (including the ‘‘must-sees’’).
Although cognitive visitor research defines an exhibition visit as an ‘‘open-ended task’’ (Mayr et
al., 2009, p. 191.), the motivations attributed to visitors are usually those of informal learning and
receiving information. These appear to be rather passive strategies given that, in most cases, visitors
are not allowed to act upon objects but only to view them. By contrast, the MET data supports the
view that visitors are much more active than they otherwise may appear to be. Visitor research by
social scientists tries to accommodate motivations and goals that go beyond effective information
gathering, considering visitors as appropriating and experiencing exhibitions in an active and embo-
died fashion (MacDonald, 2002, p. 219).

We can therefore organize our MET observations not only in terms of a list of gazes employed by
visitors looking for information. Rather, the observed scan patterns are also employed as navigation

114

Social Science Computer Review 31(1)

strategies looking for emotional and aesthetical experiences and with reference for social aspects to
do with the presence of other persons. On the basis of our results we think it is plausible (and likely)
that an ‘‘exhibition visit script’’ typically includes a number of navigation strategies and can flexibly
accommodate a spectrum of agendas (see above). With this conclusion we can also deal with raised
eye-brows towards MET that criticizes the inclusion of an ‘‘objective’’ measuring device as being
reductionist. Applying MET does not entail that exhibition visits are reduced to information gather-
ing strategies guided by principles of optimality and rational choice (cf. Bitgood, 2006 and Rounds,
2004) since the observed scan patterns may result from different - and at times conflicting -
motivations and contextual conditions. Milekic (2010) has noted that MET in visitor studies
provokes controversies between the disciplines concerned because ‘‘the major problem in adopting
these technologies is the divide that exists between traditional notions of Art and Science.’’ We
suggest that including the technology into different interdisciplinary approaches may help to design
more integrated research questions and to arrive at more satisfying answers.

Conclusion: The Potentials and Limitations of Mobile Eye Tracking and
Prospects for its Use in Field Research

MET in combination with other methods can provide us with new insights into very individual
experiences, appropriation strategies, and goals of visitors. It can get us a step closer toward ‘‘strol-
ling and viewing’’ an exhibition from the visitor’s perspective. It may also help us to detect and out-
line unconscious ‘‘exhibition visit script(s)’’ that usually can hardly be verbalized by the agents
themselves. These potential benefits matter to social scientists because MET opens the door toward
an investigation that links unconscious aspects with socially and culturally constituted forms of
embodied knowledge. It adds to our knowledge about what people look at, what they look for and
why (cf. Land & Tatler, 2009, p. 222). Cultural schemata and scripts, whether they apply to museum
exhibition visits or to other practices are notoriously difficult to investigate through external obser-
vations or through videotaping alone. The strength of MET is that it can help to break down funda-
mental questions of cognition and practice into very precise queries such as ‘‘What do persons look
at while they are interacting with other persons and why?’’, ‘‘What do persons communicate with
their words and what do they communicate with their eyes?’’ The answers to such precise questions
can then be aggregated into more general ones such as ‘‘How robust is the scan pattern that an indi-
vidual uses to view a particular scene?’’ and ‘‘How similar is this scan pattern between
individuals?.’’

MET not only generates very detailed and precise data outside the laboratory but it also allows us
to store that data so that it can be analysed again and again quantitatively or qualitatively with many
possible variations depending on the research question. A single MET recording thereby potentially
provides much more data than conventional observation. As with any other method, MET, too, is
limited in what it can provide. For instance, there are technical limitations to do with the fact that
our visual perception is only partially captured by a camera and that applying MET presupposes the
availability of electronic gadget also under adverse field conditions. Future technical developments
might reduce some of these technical limitations.

In the social sciences, we will want to combine MET with other methods such as field diary notes,
interviews, questionnaires and cued retrospective reporting that provide help when trying to link our
observations to the agents’ goals of attention. MET does not replace the investigator’s sense of
understanding the particulars of a research setting, rather it presupposes such an underlying under-
standing because only on this basis can we tune its application to the requirements of the research
context and the particular research question at hand. Applying MET is often laborious, certainly at
this stage as we are lacking a software tool for comprehensive automatic analysis. However, the real

Eghbal-Azar and Widlok

115

challenge is the integration of this technique and the data that it produces into a social science
research agenda that by its very nature will always rely on a number of complementary methods.

Authors’ Note
We would like to thank the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) for funding this
project. We thank two anonymous reviewers who commented on an earlier version of this article, sole
responsibility for the content of the article rests with the authors. We also thank Prof. Dr. Stephan Schwan,
Dr. Daniel Wessel, and our student assistants, Linda Greci and Marie-Luise Saile, as well as the Media
Technology Department of the KMRC for their support. This research would not have been possible without
the cooperation of the Linden-Museum Stuttgart, especially Dr. Ingrid Heermann, and the German
Literature Archive (DLA), and its Museum of Modern Literature, especially Dr. Heike Gfrereis and the
visitors who agreed to participate in the study. We would also like to thank Prof. Dr. Thomas Thiemeyer,
Yvonne Schweizer, and Felicitas Hartmann.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

Funding
The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication
of this article: This article has been generated within the research project ‘‘knowledge&museum: archive –
exhibit – evidence’’ that is funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) license
number 01UB0909.

Notes

1. According to Land and Tatler (2009, pp. 221–223 & pp. 4–5), it involves four different systems: The visual
system for bottom–up information about the environment; the motor system for actions within this environ-
ment; the gaze system for deciding which information is important or needed for the task at hand; the scheme
control system for top–down agendas of where to look, what to look for, and what to do. Visual perception of
museum visitors is therefore a clear case of what is now called embodied knowledge in anthropology
(Scheper-Hughes, 1994).

2. Holmqvist et al. (2011) is the first guide available for eye-tracking beginners. It provides comprehensive
information collected over many years and across many eye-tracking studies but with the clear focus on
remote (stationary) eye-tracking for experimental lab conditions.

3. Although MET devices have been commercially available since the 1980s, it took another decade before it
became realistic to study people ‘‘outside the laboratory’’. While remote eye-tracking in labs is still favored
(Land & Tatler, 2009, p. vii & p. 9.) ‘‘the role of vision during action can usefully be studied only during the
performance of action itself, preferably in conditions that are as unconstrained as possible’’ (Land & Tatler,
2009, p. vii-viii.). As mentioned above, visual perception in actions works differently from settings in front
of computer screens. So far, MET has been commonly applied in research conducted by biologists, psycho-
linguistics, psychologists, and cognitive scientists (Land & Tatler, 2009).

4. Yalowitz and Bronnenkant (2009) provide an excellent overview about tracking studies in museums but they
do not mention MET technology. Few experiences have been published on this new method. Mayr et al. (2009)
conducted the first exploratory MET study in ‘‘a small exhibition about nanotechnology’’ (pp. 191–192) at the
Knowledge Media Research Center (KMRC). Milekic (2010, webpaper) was one of the first authors who
claimed that ‘‘eye- and gaze-tracking technologies have matured enough to be considered for use in a physical
museum/gallery setting’’ and that ‘‘eye-tracking technologies can play a vital role in museum studies.’’
5. We may add here that this apparent disadvantage also provides some advantages because manual analysis
includes possibilities for the researchers who are free to define what duration is counted as a fixation and
how to classify scan patterns. If this was done automatically, we would lose an opportunity for altering

116

Social Science Computer Review 31(1)

parameters and comparing results which may lead to new insights in the process. In the meantime some
devices include software that allows some semi-automatic analysis, for example the Locarna PT Mini pro-
vides the annotator tagging tool and the SMI Eye Tracking Glasses provides the BeGaze software. However,
it is likely that researchers will always want to do some analysis manually for the reasons just mentioned.
6. Holmqvist et al. (2011, p. 256) talk of this technique as ‘‘cued retrospective thinking aloud’’ as an increas-
ingly common technique ‘‘to show the scanpath to a participant just after his data has been recorded, and ask
him to retell what he was thinking of during the initial inspection of the stimulus.’’

7. After completing the MET studies, we also conducted systematic ‘‘conventional’’ observations of particular
behavioural patterns of regular visitors. At the Linden-Museum Stuttgart this included a study of nine
selected sections within the exhibition, while at the LiMo in Marbach we observed the complete tour that
visitors took through the gallery. This was due to pragmatic reasons since in the latter case the relative dark-
ness (50 Lux) of tiny lights in the showcases created many reflections that did not allow a more detailed
observation at the level of individual showcases.

8. Note that Mayr et al. (2009) already described the ‘‘alternate fixation of objects’’ (p. 194) by which visitors
compare objects they view. It seems that this ‘‘alternating gaze’’ is in fact crucial for much information pro-
cessing in exhibition settings. We found a number of forms of ‘‘alternating gazes’’: Some visitors
made frequent and different kinds of ‘‘alternating gazes’’ (with eye movements but also with eye-head-
movements and even with eye-head-body movements) between two objects, the corresponding labels, expla-
natory texts and illustrations in order to gain more information about what to them were intriguing unknown
objects (in this case Pacific navigation maps made of sticks).

9. In our example it was the combination of MET with cued retrospective reporting that allowed us to say
something about the goal of attention: The visitor in detail four (above) said ‘‘There was a pistol; very inter-
esting’’ but still we do not know why he was interested in pistols (in general or in the particular context of
this exhibition). For this we need more information about the person in question, information that is usually
generated through interview data. In this particular case it was information not only about the interest of this
visitor but also about his disinterest, namely an apparent disinterest in literature and its most typical man-
ifestations (such as books, handwritings and typo scripts). Interview data and field diary notes show that the
visitor had little exposure to literature in his school education and professional life. Note that motivation,
interest, prior knowledge and attention are considered to be necessary factors for informal learning in
museums (Hein, 1998; cf. also Falk et al., 1998 about visitors’ agendas). Information on these highly rele-
vant aspects cannot be gained through observation alone, be they conventional or technology-assisted. It is
important to underline, therefore, that reporting and other methods should be combined with MET. On the
basis of the empirical examples given above, we may revisit the issue of MET potentials and formulate some
implications for the field of visitor studies:

References

Curator, 49, 463–475.

Baddeley, A. (2007). Working memory, thought and action. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Bitgood, S. (2006). An analysis of visitor circulation: Movement patterns and the general value principle.

Eghbal-Azar, K. (Forthcoming). Affordances, Appropriation and Experience at Museum Exhibitions: From

(Eye) Movement Patterns to Exhibition Visit Scripts. PhD thesis to be submitted.

Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis. Verbal reports as data (rev. ed.). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Falk, J. H., Koran, J. J. R., & Dierking, L. D. (1986). The things of science: Assessing the learning potential of

science museums. Science Education, 70, 503–508.

Falk, J. H., Moussouri, T., & Coulson, D. (1998). The effect of visitors ‘ Agendas on Museum Learning.

Curator, 41, 107–120.

Gfrereis, H. (2009). Didaktik des Schweigens: Das Literaturmuseum der Moderne des Deutschen Literaturarch-

ivs Marbach. Der Deutschunterricht, 2009, 20–29.

Gibson, J. J. (1986). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Eghbal-Azar and Widlok

117

Heermann, I. (2009). Su¨dsee-Oasen. Leben und U¨berleben im Westpazifik Begleitbuch zur Sonderausstellung
im Linden-Museum Stuttgart (5. Dezember 2009 – 6. Juni 2010). Linden-Museum Stuttgart/Neustadt/Wstr:
Nino Druck.

Hein, G. E. (1998). Learning in the museum. London, England: Routledge.
Hein, H. S. (2000). The museum in transition: A philosophical perspective. London, England: Smithsonian

Institution Press.

Holmqvist, K., Nystro¨m, M., Andersson, R., Dewhurst, R., Halszka, J., & van de Weijer, J. (2011). Eye

tracking: A comprehensive guide to methods and measures. Oxford University Press.

Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1980). A theory of reading: From eye fixation to comprehension. Psychological

Review, 87, 329–354.

Kaube, J. (2010). Richtige Betrachtung: Marbach blinzelt. Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung 26th August 2010.
Retrieved from http://www.faz.net/artikel/C30108/richtige-betrachtung-marbach-blinzelt-30302784.html

Korff, K. (2003). Staging science. Museumskunde, 68, 67–72.
Korff, K., & Thiemeyer, T. (2008, October). Authentizita¨t versus Szenografie. Wie das Museum das Bild des
Krieges vera¨ndert. Paper presented at the 47. Deutschen Historikertag in Dresden 2008. Proceeding
retrieved from http://books.google.de/books?id¼k9Hj1Uyt5r4C&pg¼PA137&lpg¼PA137&dq¼"gehenþ
undþsehen"þThiemeyer&source¼bl&ots¼FIzLsqjv5L&sig¼gbjWJoR2ku4n3uVWmla9e-M77Bw&hl¼
de&ei¼HIkG

Land, M. F., & Tatler, B. W. (2009). Looking and acting: Vision and eye movement in natural behaviour. New

York, NY: Oxford University Press.

MacDonald, S. (2002). Behind the scenes at the science museum. Oxford, England: Berg.
Mayr, E., Knipfer, K., & Wessel, D. (2009). In-sights into mobile learning: An exploration of mobile eye tracking
methodology for learning in museums. In G. Vavoula, N. Pachler, & A. Kukulska-Hulme (Eds.), Researching
mobile learning: Frameworks, tools and research designs (pp. 189–204). Oxford, England: Peter Lang.
Milekic, S. (2010). Inside your head: Use of eye-tracking for museum installations and websites. Retrieved

from http://www.uarts-eyetracking.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/11milekicNodemPaper.pdf

Rounds, J. (2004). Strategies for the curiosity-driven museum visitor. Curator, 47,389–412.
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals and understanding: An inquiry into human knowledge

structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Scheper-Hughes, N. (1994). Embodied Knowledge. In R. Borofsky (Ed.), Assessing Cultural Anthropology.

Serell, B. (1997). Paying attention: The duration and allocation of visitors‘ time in museum exhibitions.

New York: Graw-Hill, 229–242.

Curator, 40, 108–125.

van Gog, T., Paas, F., van Merrie¨nboer, J. J. G., & Witte, P. (2005). Uncovering the problem solving process:
Cued retrospective reporting versus concurrent and retrospective reporting. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 11, 237–244.

van Someren, M. W., Barnard, Y. F., & Sandberg, J. A. C. (1994). The think aloud method: A practical guide to

modeling cognitive processes. London, England: Academic Press.

Yalowitz, S. S., & Bronnenkant, K. (2009). Timing and tracking: Unlocking visitor behavior. Visitor Studies,

12, 47–64.

Author Biographies

Kira Eghbal-Azar is a research scientist associated with the Knowledge Media Research Center (KMRC)
Tuebingen as part of the interdisciplinary cooperation project ‘‘knowledge & museum: archive - exhibit -
evidence’’ in the Cybermedia lab (Professor S. Schwan). She is currently preparing her PhD thesis entitled
‘‘Affordances, Appropriation and Experience at Museum Exhibitions: From (Eye) Movement Patterns to

118

Social Science Computer Review 31(1)

Exhibition Visit Scripts’’. Her main interest is combining anthropological and psychological theories and
methods in visitor studies. She can be reached at k.eghbal-azar@iwm-kmrc.de.

Thomas Widlok is a professor for social and cultural anthropology at Radboud University Nijmegen and a
research associate at the University of Cologne. He received his PhD at the London School of Economics and
has previously taught at
the universities of London, Heidelberg, Durham, Zurich, and Cologne. His
specializations include the hunter–gatherer studies, the anthropology of mobility, and cognitive anthropology.
He can be reached at t.widlok@maw.ru.nl.

