See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/338729240

Seeking Lost Memories: Application of a new visual methodology for heritage
protection

Article  in  Geographical Review · January 2020

DOI: 10.1080/00167428.2020.1715800


CITATIONS

4

READS

117

6 authors, including:


Meiting Zhao
University of Glasgow

2 PUBLICATIONS    4 CITATIONS

Lin Mingliang

East China Normal University

7 PUBLICATIONS    4 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE                                                                     
                                                                                
                                                      SEE PROFILE


Wei Cao

South China Normal University

6 PUBLICATIONS    56 CITATIONS

Huilin Zhu

Sun Yat-Sen University

24 PUBLICATIONS    217 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE                                                                     
                                                                                
                                                      SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Ning An on 12 August 2021.

The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.


Geographical Review

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/utgr20

SEEKING LOST MEMORIES: APPLICATION OF A
NEW VISUAL METHODOLOGY FOR HERITAGE
PROTECTION

Min Wang , Meiting Zhao , Mingliang Lin , Wei Cao , Huilin Zhu & Ning An

To cite this article: Min Wang , Meiting Zhao , Mingliang Lin , Wei Cao , 
Huilin Zhu
& Ning An (2020) SEEKING LOST MEMORIES: APPLICATION OF A NEW VISUAL

METHODOLOGY FOR HERITAGE PROTECTION, Geographical Review, 110:4, 556-574, DOI:
10.1080/00167428.2020.1715800

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00167428.2020.1715800

View supplementary material

Accepted author version posted online: 21
Jan 2020.

Published online: 20 Feb 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 75

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=utgr20


SEEKING LOST MEMORIES: APPLICATION OF A NEW
VISUAL METHODOLOGY FOR HERITAGE PROTECTION

MIN WANG, MEITING ZHAO   , MINGLIANG LIN   , WEI CAO, HUILIN ZHU

and NING AN

ABSTRACT. A society’s cultural heritage is its inheritance of physical 
artifacts and intangible
attributes,  and  their  maintenance,  protection,  and  continuation  for  
future  generations.
The meaning of cultural heritage is, however, constantly changing in light of 
globalization
and  rapid  urbanization.  To  better  understand  interactions  between  
people  and  cultural
heritage  in  daily  life,  and  return  cultural  heritage  to  its  sense  
of“place,”we  present

a  visual  methodology  for  heritage  protection.  Considering  the  Guangzhou 
 overseas-
Chinese community (OCC) as a case study, we apply pictorial assessment, 
eye-tracking,
and  interview  methods  to  identify  meanings  of  a  returned  
overseas-Chinese  inhabited
area. Proposing a hybrid visual method, we aim to focus on the public’s 
interpretation of
cultural heritage with regard to safeguarding it. Results indicate that the 
cultural heritage
of the overseas-Chinese site has weakened over time due to its increasing 
importance as
a metropolitan area. In accordance with our results, this paper offers insights 
for protec-
tion  measures  with  a  focus  on  architectural  details,  activities,  and  
publicities.  From  the
perspective of“neural turn,”we also propose a new method for cultural heritage 
protec-
tion    that can effectively answer non-representational geographical questions 
and discuss
cultural heritage protection in a fluid, embodied, and abstract 
context.Keywords: Visual
analysis, Neuroscience, Eye-tracking, Cultural heritage, Overseas-Chinese 
culture.

Cultural heritage is a product of social history that is brought into the 
present
by  the  past  (Nikielska-Sekula  2019),  and  represents  people’s  place  
memory
(Brunson  1993).  Memories  from  life  in  the  past  are  expressions  of  
individual
life  experiences  (Burk  2003);  the  assemblage  of  individual  experiences  
thus  be-

comes the collective memory of social groups. These memories are contained in
specific  social  spaces  and  interact  with  the  place  (Hoelscher  2004).  
However,
complexity   and   mobility   of   contemporary   urban   society   puts   
pressure   on
collective  memories  stored  by  a  society,  rendering  them  vulnerable  to  
reinter-
pretation and loss. Scholars have considered various nuanced meanings of col-
lective  memory:  according  to  Paul  Shackel  and  Dwight  Pitcaithley  
(2003),
collective memory is essentially the expression of discourse influenced by poli-
tical and economic relations; Karen Till (1999) discusses collective memory as 
the
result of mutual consultation among different subjects, which is reflected in 
the

MIN   WANG   South  China  Normal  University,  No.55,  Zhongshan  Avenue  
West,  South  China  Normal
University,  Guangzhou,  China.        MEITING  ZHAO  South  China  Normal  
University,  No.55,  Zhongshan  Avenue
West,  South  China  Normal  University,  Guangzhou,  China.        MINGLIANG  
LIN  East  China  Normal  University
No.500, Dongchuan Road, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.        
WEI  CAO  Centre for Optical and
Electromagnetic Research, South China Academy of Advanced Optoelectronics, 
South China Normal University
No.55, Zhongshan Avenue West, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.  
      HUILIN  ZHU  Children
Developmental & Behavioral Center, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University No.600, Tianhe Road,
Third  Affiliated  Hospital  of  Sun  Yat-Sen  University,  Guangzhou,  China.  
      NING  AN  Guangzhou  University
No.230, Outer Ring Road, Guangzhou University City, Guangzhou, China; [ 
ning_ann@126.com]

Geographical Review110(4):556–574,2020

DOI:10.1080/00167428.2020.1715800

Copyright ©2020by the American Geographical Society of New York


performance  of  a  cultural  landscape;  Don  Mitchell  (2001)  argues  that  
cultural
landscape is the discourse expression in people’s long-term power struggles. F-
rom these perspectives, cultural heritage is the result of politicization 
impacting
the  reconstruction  of  collective  memory  (Whelan  2005).  Cultural  
heritage  pro-

tectors  are,  therefore,  naturally  motivated  to  ask“Whose  memory  should  
be

protected?”

Controversy  surrounding  cultural  heritage  originates  from  its  political  
and
economic  value.  Scholars  such  as  Brian  Graham  (2002)  and  Rodney  
Harrison
(2015) assert that cultural heritage is produced in a process of remembering and
forgetting. Furthermore, the value of cultural heritage will change over time 
with the
prevalent social demands of that period (Harvey 2001; Graham 2002). That which 
is
inherited from previous generations may not be maintained or esteemed for the

benefit of future generations. On one hand, cultural heritage will present 
different
content, representations, and interpretations of discourse, symbols, and texts 
from
the  perspective  of  different  interests.  Cultural  heritage  can  reflect  
the  symbolic
significance  of  a  country,  nation,  race,  class,  and  even  power  
struggles.  In

a representation of political discourse, Janet Blake (2000) as well as Del Pozo 
and
Gonzalez (2012) argue that cultural heritage can affect the cognition and 
identity of
citizens,  social  groups,  and  nations.  Simultaneously,  as  cultural  
capitals,  cultural

heritage can be  used to  stimulate  urban economic  growth, for  example, 
cultural
heritage tourism (García-Hernández and others 2017; Su and others 2018). In this
context, cultural heritage is transformed into an urban“brand”; urban marketing

strategies  help  not  only  to  create  a  unique  urban  image,  but,  with  
increasing
globalization,  also  make  cities  more  competitive  (Kavaratzis  2004;  
Bowitz  and
Ibenholt  2009). According  to  Graham  (2002),  the  content  of cultural  
heritage  is
the result of a selection of particular values and concepts of the city in 
present time.

Therefore, the protection of cultural heritage involves the interaction of 
different
power  structures  and  relationships  (Harvey  2001).  The  construction  of  
cultural
heritage entails the creation, destruction, and reconstruction of cultural 
symbols—
a political process of power (Marschall 2006).

Regardless, the meanings of symbols depend on how they are interpreted by
people (Buckley 1998). Different spatio-temporal individuals have different 
under-
standings  of“mapping  meaning”from  the  cultural  landscape.  Cultural  
heritage
has obvious place characteristics that are closely related to everyday life. In 
other

words,  cultural  heritage is  a“witness”to  the  human  past.  For  example,  
cultural
heritage can help migrations maintain their sense of belonging and feel secure 
in
their  concept  of“home”(Nikielska-Sekula     2016).  It  can  also  influence  
residents’

daily behaviors and weaken place identity and attachments (Amin 2018). However,

Del  Pozo  and  Gonzalez  (2012)  assert  that  residents  are  not  interested 
 in  the
cultural resources of their industrial heritage due to the lack of a routine 
connec-

tion to these resources. The aforementioned studies indicate that cultural 
heritage
is the result of human practices  in a particular place, and that  the 
protection of


cultural  heritage  should  also  return  to  humans  themselves  (McDowell  
2008).
Protection of cultural  heritage extends not only  to  the material objects,  
but  also
to  intangible  objects,  such  as  memories,  emotions,  cultural  
performances,  and
activities (Lenzerini 2011). The existence and death of cultural heritage means 
that
one’s cognition of a place has changed. The making of meaning in regard to 
place,

according   to   Daniel   Stokols  and   Sally   Shumaker  (1981)  as  well  as 
 Richard
Steadman (2002), is the inner psychological construction and perception process
of  the  social  life  of  people  who  have  lived  in  one  location  over  a 
 long  time.
Therefore,  this  paper  hopes  to  return  cultural  heritage  to  a“place”in  
order  to

better understand daily interactions between people and cultural heritage, and 
to
also offer effective suggestions for the protection of cultural heritage.

In  general,  the  meaning  of  culture  depends  on  how  people  interpret  
it.
The sense of sight is a significant way to“read”cultural landscapes, especially
ongoing  unconscious“seeing”(Lowenthal       1985).  The  cultural  meaning  of
daily  life  is  constructed  through  vision,  so  the  methods  used  to  
investigate
visual  symbols,  including  content  analysis,  semiology,  psychoanalysis,  
and
discourse  analysis  (Rose  2002)  could  be  used  in  cultural  heritage  
protection.

The visual process is the performance of the body. The body has increasingly
become an important research object of cultural geography, particularly embo-
died  cognition,  affects  and  practices  (Longhurst  1997).  In  the  context 
 of  this
paper,  affects  are  not  specifically“you,  it,  subject,  object,”but  
rather,  relations

between  things.  We  agree  that  when  researchers  tap  into  implicit  
attitudes
(Greenwald  and  Banaji  1995),  the  vision  of  cultural  landscape  
contains“more-
than-representational”significance   (Lorimer      2005).   With   regard   to  
 Non-
Representation  Theory  (NRT),  Nigel  Thrift  (2007,7)  writes  that“we  
should

also  pay  more  attention  to  the  precognitive.  This  roiling  mass  of  
nerve  volleys
prepare the body for action in such a way that intentions or decisions are made
before the conscious self is even aware of them.”NRT methods of experimenta-
tion,  picturing,  and  sensing  have  been  enriched  by  Lorimer  (2005)  in  
order  to
further   account   for   intricacies   and   unfolding   relations   in   
individual   lives
(Vannini  2015;  Dowling  and  others  2018).  This  includes  the  biological  
body
and  innovations  such  as  biosensors,  which  are  now  incorporated  into  
studies
(Spinney 2015; Osborne and Jones 2017).

Due to the popularity of NRT and body research, the term“neural turn”has
gained credence in human geography (Korf 2008; Pykett 2018). Neuroscience 
increas-
ingly provides new perspectives and methods for geography. It helps with 
indefinable
“affect” (Davidson and Sutton 1995; Barnett 2010), memory (Dadvand and others
2018),  and  perception  (Proffitt  2006)  attributed  to  the  brain  and/or  
physiological

activities; it provides direct evidence that can be described. There are many 
applica-
tions of neuroscience in geography studies. Widely used in the present study, 
eye-
tracking is alsoo applied in other works to study tourists’imaginings of 
destination
images (Wang and Sparks 2016), cognitive patterns related to finding one’s way 
in


cities (Kiefer and others 2012), and cognitive differences in the sensation of 
environ-
ment between urban and rural residents (Bodor and Illes 2008).

With the use of eye-tracking, researchers have been able to specifically observe
saccadic  eye  movement,  gaze  fixation,  and  pupil  response  (Roberts  and  
others
2016). Using this tool allows the recording of people’s visual perceptions to 
better
understand   cognitive   and   emotional   changes   as   they   view   
specific   images.
Ultimately this neuroscientific approach may provide a first-person private 
experi-
ence  of“seeing,”offer insights  into  the  relationship  between  body  and  
environ-
ment, and yield useful quantified measurements when examining that relationship
(Osborne  and  Jones  2017;  Beljaars  2018).  The  eye-tracking  test  helps  
us  to  more
effectively  comprehend  how  humans  see,  including  how  we  focus  and  
process
stimuli from the external world into the human brain (Berger 2008).

In  effect,  this  paper  proposes  a  hybrid  visual  method  in  which  we  
pay
attention to the public’s interpretation of cultural heritage and the need for 
its
protection. We suggest that it is not sufficient to only study neural processes,
but that underlying social and cultural significance should also be examined. It
does not sever the relationship between nature and the humanities; however, it
does  oppose  the  tendency  towards  neural  reductionism.  We  agree  with  
Des
Fitzgerald  and  Felicity  Callard  (2015)  that  knowledge  of  the  
humanities  can
supplement  the  surplus  theoretical  space  of  neuroscience.  Therefore,  we 
 do
not abandon the first-person (subjective) analytical method, but rather intend
to  simultaneously  provide  verification  from  the  third-person  
perspective.

The contribution of this paper is to provide a hybrid visual research method for
cultural heritage protection from the perspective of the body and NRT. In the 
body
performance-visual process, the NRT method is helpful to learn individual 
perception
of cultural heritage protection and to better understand interactions between 
people
and  cultural  heritage  in  everyday  life.  We  aim  to  retrieve  the  
collective  memory
contained in the negotiation process of different power structures and return 
it to
the relationship between“human”and“place,”and also offer suggestions for 
cultural
heritage protection.

Using Guangzhou OCC as our case study, we apply pictorial assessment, eye-
tracking, and individual interviews to identify the place meanings of a returned
overseas-Chinese inhabited area.

CASE  STUDY: THE  OVERSEAS-CHINESE  COMMUNITY  IN  GUANGZHOU

During  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries,  the  Chinese  economy  
fell  into
a  deep  slump  on  account  of  prolonged  wars,  and  many  Chinese  
individuals—
mainly  from  the  south—were  forced  to  migrate  to  Southeast  Asia,  North
America,  Europe,  and  Latin  America.  However,  upon  the  creation  of  the
People’s  Republic  of  China  (PRC)  in1949,  China’s  political  and  economic
situation began to stabilize. At that time, the PRC provided strong policy 
support
in    its effort to attract overseas Chinese migrants back to China to help 
develop


the domestic economy (Fitzgerald 1972). In response, returned overseas Chinese,
known asguiqiao, moved back and resettled in China. With continued support,
the OCC became widespread in South China from1950to1959, and comprised
the unique geopolitical and geo-economic landscapes of China.

Our  case  study  focuses  on  the  OCC  located  in  Guangzhou,  one  of  the  
few
“villa  districts”in  this  city.  Built  in  the1950s  as  thefirstreturned  
overseas-
Chinese  inhabited  area  after  the  PRC  was  founded,  it  was  designed  
with  the
intention  of  taking  good  care  of  the  overseas-Chinese  community  and  
their
families who had returned from Southeast Asia, effectively becoming the embo-
diment  and  material  carriers  of  China.  Overseas  Chinese  culture  is  
the  fusion
and  connection  of  overseas  culture  and  local  culture.  During  the  
Cultural
Revolution  of  the1960s,  which  stimulated  and  accelerated  political  and  
class
struggles,  some  overseas  Chinese  once  again  began  moving  away  from  
China
(Peterson 2013). Years later, after an increase in real estate transactions in 
urban
areas  on  account  of  post-open  and  reformed  China,  property  rights  
exchanges
accelerated,  and  thus,  the  functional  transformation  of  the  OCC  
occured.  The
landscapes did not change drastically (Zhao and Wang 2016) despite the fact that
the OCC areas were transformed largely by restaurants, bars, and Small Office &
Home Office(SOHO) areas. A small section of property is still reserved for the
returned  overseas  Chinese  to  occupy.  In  the  meanwhile,  urban  planners  
have
been  keen  to  incorporate  history  into  the  contemporary  development  of  
cities.
For  instance,  the  Guangzhou  OCC  became  the  first  batch  of  historical  
and
cultural protection areas in2000(Guangzhou Local Records Committee    2009).

The  Guangzhou  Famous  City  Office  officially  introduced  
theOverseas-Chinese

Heritage  Historical  Cultural  Protection  Area  Protecting  Planin2004,   and
announced  its  official  implementation  in  one  area  of  Guangzhou  in2006
(Guangzhou Famous City Office 2006).

On the whole, policy support for the Guangzhou OCC has had a profound
influence on the social and cultural meaning of these landscapes. Their geopo-
litical  and  geo-economic  significance  remains  in  the  collective  memory  
of  the
OCC as the repository of valuable historical and cultural relics. It is 
noteworthy
that the uniqueness of the OCC is that it still retains the function of 
residence,
but  new  dwellers  over  the  years  have  gifted  it  with  additional  and  
different
meanings. The question remains as to whether the community’s corresponding
spatial connotation will continue as cultural heritage going into the future. 
For
the  ongoing  protection  of  historical  returned  overseas-Chinese  habitats, 
 it  is
critical  that  the  collective  memory  and  social  life—a  process  
requiring  close
attention  to  everyday  activities—be  preserved.  We  endeavored  to  
understand
the  relationship  between  cultural  heritage  and  place,  and  to  learn  
more  about
how it influences people’s perceptions.


STUDY  DESIGN

The  paper  uses  a  hybrid  visual  analysis  method  to  explore  perceptions 
 of
residents  and  nonresidents.  The  visual  analysis  of  the  OCC  was  
conducted  in
three  parts:  pictorial  assessment,  eye-tracking  experiment,  and  
interview.  The
research was conducted in five steps, as discussed below.

Step1:  Theme  selection.  In  mid-February2015,  the  keywords“overseas-
Chinese  community”and“Huan  Shi  Dong  Road”were  entered  into  an  online
search  engine  (www.baidu.com).  From  the  research  the  themes“villa  
district,”
“bar street,” “fashion place,” “rich district,” “small Western-style villa,” 
“natural
oxygen  bar,”and“15-minute  living  circle,”came  to  the  fore.  After  
in-person
investigation  and  interviews  with  returned  overseas-Chinese  residents  in 
 the
Guangzhou OCC, we added“paradise of returned overseas Chinese,” “historical
and cultural preservation district,”and“celebrity gathering place”to the list. 
In
all,  ten  themed  groups  were  selected:“villa  district,”  “bar  
street”(Group2),
“fashion place,” “paradise of returned overseas Chinese,” “historical and 
cultural
preservation district,” “rich district,” “small Western-style villa,” “natural 
oxygen
bar,”  “15-minute   living  circle,”and“celebrity   gathering  place.”    ¹  
The   study
recorded  residents’and  nonresidents’impressions  and  identification  with  
the

OCC.

Step2: Choice of photographs. In accordance with the ten themed groups,44
photos were chosen to represent the OCC (Fig.1 ). The photos were provided by

village residents, taken from historical files, and newer images were shot by 
the
author.

Step3:  Photo  assessment.  In  all,88residents  of  the  OCC  were  invited  to
assess the photos in Figure1  based on3categories: familiarity, pleasure & 
beauty,
and  excitement  &  interest.  A  five-point  Likert  scale  was  applied  to  
obtain  an
index  for  measuring  the  degree  of  perception  (1for  lowest,5for 
highest).  The
first  category,  familiarity,  refers  to  participants’experience  with,  and 
 comfort

level  towards  the  environment  depicted  in  the  photos.  Second,  pleasure 
 and
beauty refers to participants’possible pleasant joyful moods and overall mental
status  while  observing  the  photos;  hence,  the  pleasure  &  beauty  
category  cap-
tures both positive and negative emotions (Hu and Lin 2006). Third, excitement
&  interest  refers  to  the  degree  to  which  the  selected  photographs  
arouse  an
emotional response and some level of arousal based on environmental stimulus.

Step4:  Eye-tracking  experiment.  Next,44nonresidents  of  the  OCC  were
invited to participate in an eye-movement test consisting of former observation
length, first fixation, fixation count, and heatmaps. These data were collected 
and
participants were interviewed based on the results of their eye-tracking test. 
The
study used Tobii X3-120Eye Trackers and Tobii Studio software to collect and

¹ Fuzzy  membership  function  method:  positive  indicator,  use  half  liter  
trapezoidal  fuzzy  membership
function  to  standardize  so  that  Xi  standardize  =  (Xi-Xmin)/(Xmax-Xmin); 
 negative  indicator,  use  half  liter
trapezoidal fuzzy membership function to standardize so that Xi standardize = 
(Xmax–Xi)/(Xmax-Xmin).


FIG.1—The44photos for visual analysis

record data. To ensure data robustness, we conducted the test in a quiet room.
The resolution of the computer monitor was1080p and the distance between the
monitor   and   participant   was   approximately60cms,   which   was   deemed
comfortable.

Step5: Data analysis. Our analysis method of pictorial assessment was Mean
Value and Multiple Comparison Test of the photo groups. The analysis method
of the eye-tracking test involved sorting the sums of former observation length,
first fixation, and fixation count, and the heatmaps.

Interview. Interviews were held throughout the research process, both before
selecting  themes,  and  after  the  photo  assessment  and  eye-tracking  
experiment.
The  interviewees  included  returned  overseas  Chinese,  new  residents,  and 
 non-
residents of the Guangzhou OCC.

RESULTS  OF  PHOTO  ASSESSMENT

After  completing  assessments  of  the44chosen  photos,  we  obtained  two  
main
results.  First,  in  the  sorting  (see  Table  a  in  Figure2  ),  
Group4(paradise  of
returned  overseas  Chinese)  and  Group5(historical  and  cultural  
preservation
district)  displayed  a  low  score  in  all  three  dimensions  (the  lowest  
group  was
Group2),  indicating  that  residents  may  have  a  low  cognition  degree  
towards
“historical and cultural preservation district”and“paradise of returned overseas
Chinese,”which  strongly  represents  the  overseas-Chinese  culture  of  the  
OCC.
Whereas   three  of  the  highest  emotional  arousal  degree  groups  were  
Group9
(15-minute  living  circle),  Group8(natural  air  oxygen  bar),  and  
Group6(rich


FIG.2—The results and graphical depiction of the mean value of the3emotional 
dimensions

district). These findings show noteworthy differences in the perception of resi-
dents and nonresidents of the OCC since the1950s.

oxygenAs  of1979,  Guangzhou  real  estate  transactions  recovered  from  the
economic downturn, and people were to freely trade their property rights (or
homes)  on  the  market.  By1984,  the  OCC  had  begun  the  process  of  
property
rights  change.  Along  with  these  changes,  residents  and  architectural  
forms
were  also  dramatically  changed.  A  first  significant  difference  is  the  
gradual
shift  in  the  type  of  inhabitants  from  the  returned  overseas  Chinese  
of  the
1950s   to   the1990s,   to   foreigners   and   high-income   white-collar   
workers
(present  day);  therefore,  we  did  not  expect  the  history  of  the  
returned  over-
seas Chinese to resonate with new entrants. Second, the current heterogeneity
of  residents  in  the  OCC  also  leads  to  differences  in  values  and  
lifestyles
among them. In addition, heterogeneity weakens the identity of new entrants
into  the  community,  in  that  they  are  unlikely  to  take  the  initiative 
 to  engage
with  other  residents.  If  new  neighborhood  contacts  cannot  be  
successfully
established,   this   could   lead   to   minimal   or   a   total   lack   of  
 neighborhood
contact  and  communication.

We (the returned Overseas Chinese and new neighbors) do not know each other 
now. How
can we know when the new neighbor’s door is closed?

—Interview L, one returned Overseas Chinese who had returned in the1960s;
September9,2014

Thus, we suspect that new entrants are unlikely to encounter returned overseas
Chinese in regard to their special activities, unique narratives, or by way of 
daily
neighborhood  interaction.  The  special  history  of  the  OCC  is  likely  to 
 be  mis-
understood   during   oral   or   neighborhood   contacts,   even   if   they   
occur.
Furthermore, physical forms of buildings have also changed as occupants have
changed,  but  in  order  for  memories  of  attachment  to  place  to  be  
recalled,  the
material  structure  must  still  be  standing.  However,  major  alterations  
have


already  occurred;  changes  to  the  surrounding  architectural  environment  
no
longer  directly  reflect  the  history  of  the  returned  overseas  Chinese’s 
 special
period during the1950s. Residents of the OCC are therefore unable to compre-
hend the relevant history of the place by observing the physical environment of
the OCC. This finding is verified in our photo analysis.

Our second main result in the pictorial analysis involved the use of Multiple
Comparison Test, where we estimated the degree of differences between groups
by  applying  a  one-way  analysis  of  variance.  We  found  significant  
differences
between  Group2and  Group6,  Group2and  Group8,  Group2and  Group9,

Group3and Group9, Group4and Group9, and Group5and Group9(p<0.01).

Thereafter, the weight of each photograph in its group was calculated using the
entropy method, and each photo’s score was weighted. Next, the weighted data
of the three dimensions were estimated in Multiple Comparison Tests using the
Least Significant Difference (LSD) method. After the pair-by-pair comparison of
the mean value of the three dimensions, we estimated the degree of significant
differences between them. The Multiple Comparison Test results are presented
in Table1 .

Based  on  statistics  of  differences  among  groups  in  the  pictorial  
analysis
results, the dimension of familiar–strange showed the widest differences between
groups  and  residents,  respectively:  Group9(15-minute  living  circle)—Group2
(bar  street),  Group9(15-minute  living  circle)—Group4(paradise  of  returned
overseas Chinese), Group8(natural oxygen bar)—Group2(bar street), Group9

(15-minute living circle)—Group5(historical and cultural preservation district),
and Group9(15-minute living circle)—Group3(fashion place).

In the dimension of pleasure–disgust, the main differences between the groups
and residents, respectively, were Group9(15-m   inute living circle)—Group2(bar
street), Group8(natural oxygen bar)—Group2(bar street), Group9(15-minute

TABLE  1—THE  RESULT  OF  MULTIPLE  COMPARISONS  OF  FAMILIARITY, PLEASURE  AND 
 EXCITEMENT

GROUP                                                  FAMILIARITY              
                             PLEASURE                                           
EXCITEMENT


GROUP

(I)

GROUP

(J)

MEAN  DIFFERENCE

(I–J)                SIG.

MEAN  DIFFERENCE

(I–J)                SIG.

MEAN  DIFFERENCE

(I–J)                SIG.

6                  2                   0.89              0.000              
0.79              0.000              0.85              0.000

8                   2                    1.35              0.000              
0.93              0.000              0.89              0.000

9                  2                    1.93              0.000              
1.26              0.000              1.24              0.000

3                    1.31               0.000              0.89              
0.000              0.86              0.000

4                    1.73              0.000              0.84              
0.000              0.81              0.000

5                    1.34              0.000              0.87              
0.000              0.82              0.000

The mean difference is significant at the0.01level.


living circle)—Group3(fashion place), Group9(15-minute living circle)—Group5
(historical and cultural preservation district), and Group9(15-minute living 
circle)

—Group4(paradise of returned overseas Chinese).

Finally, in the dimension of exciting–boring, the biggest differences between
the groups and the residents, respectively, were Group9(15-minute living 
circle)

—Group2(bar  street),  Group8(natural  oxygen  bar)—Group2(bar  street),
Group9(15-minute  living  circle)—Group3(fashion  place),  Group6(rich
district)—Group2,  and  Group9(15-minute  living  circle)—Group5(historical

and cultural preservation district).

The main finding of the pictorial analysis revealed that the15-minute living
circle  is  the  most  familiar  group,  because  it  reflects  daily  routines 
 of  OCC
residents.  A  shopkeeper  reported  that  the  customers  were  mostly  
white-collar
workers  employed  in  close  proximity.  The  study  also  revealed  that  
residents
seldom  patronize  bars  and  restaurants  (Interviews,  OCC  on11,12,14,  and

15September2014),  and  therefore,  were  ambiguous  with  in  regard  to  bars 
 and

restaurants. The strongest comparison of familiar–strange landscape is apparent
in  the“15-minute  living  circle”and“bar  street.”The  wide  differences  
between
groups in the dimension of exciting-boring as aforementioned (“15-minute living
circle,” “natural oxygen bar,” “bar street,”and“historical    and cultural 
preserva-
tion district”) are due to minimal contact among residents in their daily 
lives.

Our   results   from   the   three-dimension   analysis   confirm   that,   
after   the
Guangzhou  real  estate  market  began  to  strengthen  in1979,  and  as  the  
returned
overseas Chinese in the OCC engaged in property rights change, these new circum-
stances  meant  that  the  residents  as  well  as  the  material  forms  of  
OCC  would
correspondingly  alter.  The  number  of  overseas  Chinese  began  to  
diminish  and
younger entrants increased to the extent that the history of the returned 
overseas
Chinese  barely  resonates  in  present  day.  Moreover,  the  heterogeneity  
of  main
groups of current residents in the OCC has led to strong differences in values 
and
leisure modes, weakening the shared identity of new entrants in relation to 
other
residents.  The  implication  here  is  that  residents  are  now  less  
willing  to  initiate
contact with neighbors and other residents who are nearby. As a result, 
residents in
low-rise garden-style houses have almost no neighborhood communication.

RESULTS  OF  EYE-TRACKING  EXPERIMENT

With regard to eye-tracking data analysis and pictorial assessment, we obtained
three noteworthy results.

Result One. The sorting result of the sum of former observation length, first
fixation, and fixation count (standardization).

First,  we  standardized  data  of  the  former  observation  length,  first  
fixation,
and  fixation  count  using  the  Fuzzy  membership  function  method¹,  which  
we
then summed and sorted (Table2 ). The analysis once again revealed that Groups
4and5ranked  almost  last  in  the  eye-tracking  test  (     Table3  ),  
placing  fifth  and


TABLE  2—THE  RESULT  OF  THE  EYE-TRACKING  TEST  AND  THE  SORTING


SORT                                              GROUP

FORMER  OBSERVATION
LENGTH

FIRST
FIXATION

FIXATION

COUNT            SUM

1Group6(rich district)                                                      
0.704                  0.754           0.909       2.367

2Group2(bar street)                                                         
1.000                  1.000           0.000       2.000

3Group3(fashion place)                                                    0.991 
                 0.874           0.094        1.959

4Group1(villa district)                                                      
0.751                  0.776           0.146        1.673


5Group4(paradise of returned Overseas
Chinese)

0.293                  0.692           0.508        1.493

6Group10(celebrity gathering place)0.183                  0.673           0.636 
       1.491

7Group7(small western-style villa)0.000                  0.556           0.893  
      1.448


8Group5(historical and cultural
preservation district)

0.476                  0.684           0.239        1.398

9Group9(15-minute living circle)0.630                  0.456           0.101    
     1.187

10Group8(natural oxygen bar)0.014                  0.000           1.000        
1.014

TABLE  3—THE  EYE-TRACKING  ANALYSIS  RESULT  OF  GROUPS  4 AND  5


SORT                                        PHOTO

1        5.6Historical and cultural
preservation district

2        5.2Historical and cultural
preservation district

3        5.1Historical and cultural
preservation district

THE  SUM  OF  FORMER  OBSERVATION  LENGTH, FIRST  FIXATION
AND  FIXATION  COUNT

3.16

2.47

2.30

4       4.2Housewarming banquet                                                 
          2.16

5        4.1The home of Overseas Chinese                                        
       2.07

6       4.4New Year hall                                                        
                   1.99

7        4.5Birthday banquet                                                    
                   1.98


8       5.5Historical and cultural
preservation district

9       5.4Historical and cultural
preservation district

1.70

1.52

10      4.3Visiting                                                             
                         1.37


11       5.3Historical and cultural
preservation district

0.49


eighth respectively, indicating that nonresidents expressed a measurable degree
of low emotional awakening to the place meaning of“returned overseas-Chinese
inhabited  area.”When  we  combined  data  of  pictorial  assessment  and  the  
eye-
tracking  experiment,  we  noticed  that  the  public  may  have  a  low  
identification
with  the  place  meaning  of“returned  overseas-Chinese  inhabited  area”and
oversea-Chinese  culture.  Our  study,  revealed  that  despite  being  a  
historically
protected  area since2004, the OCC does not promote the history of China and

the  returned  overseas  Chinese  to  the  extent  that  the  connection  
to“country”

community   is   high   and   inspires   very   strong   attachment   the   to  
 country.
Therefore, at present, the OCC are inadequately protected.

We observed that Groups6,2, and3showed the highest emotional awakening
degree of  nonresidents having  hardly  any  connection  to  the  OCC.  On  one 
 hand,
photos  of“villa  district,” “bar  street,”and“fashion  place”depicted  a  
colorful  and
exaggerated  architectural  style  that  stimulated  conspicuous  visual  
responses  and
strong emotions in nonresidents during the eye-tracking experiment.

Group2and  Group3(“bar  street”and“fashion  place”)  are  notable.  Groups3,6,  
and7
(“fashion place”/“rich  district”/“small  Western-style villa”) represent  the 
formation  of this
place.  For  example,  the  structures  in  these  areas  are  not  like  the  
modern  community
buildings  which  look  identical.  Instead,  every  house  has  its  own  
style  and  combines  both
Chinese  and  foreign  architectural  features.  This  type  of  photo  
stimulates  my  curiosity—I
want to  know  the story  of the  owner of  the house and  guess the countries  
he has  visited

before.

—Interview C, a nonresident in Guangzhou; October11,2017

The unfamiliar architectural styles have sparked the curiosity of some nonresi-
dents,  and  such  strong  visual  impacts  have  redirected  their  attention  
and
deepened their imagination about“the rich district,” “bar street,”and“fashion
place,”thereby  further  exacerbating  the  concealment  of  overseas-  Chinese
culture.        The  image  conveyed  to  the  public  and  the  media  in  
response  to  the
OCC  is“a  low-key  luxury  in  downtown,”so  the“villa  district,” “bar  
street,”
“fashion place,”and“rich district”more closely match their  imagination. It  is
noteworthy  that  the  everyday  life  facilities  function  of  the  OCC  does 
 not
stimulate  high  levels  of  emotional  arousal  within  nonresidents,  unlike  
the
grouping  of  the  entertainment  and  restaurant  function  (that  has  closer 
 daily
life  connection  and  body  connection).  Therefore,  nonresidents  had  a  
higher
emotional awakening degree to“villa district,” “bar street,” “fashion place,”and
“rich district.”

On the other hand, according to Predictive Coding Theory, the brain will use
prior  knowledge  and  experience  to  generate  models  in  order  to  reduce  
uncer-
tainty in the cognition system (Clark 2013; Gładziejewski 2016). In other words,
a person focuses on the thing that conforms to his or her representation system
and then attempts to code it. Through the promotion of media,“villa district,”
“bar  street,” “fashion  place,”and“rich  district”become  the  participant’s  
first


impression   of   the   OCC.  Indeed,   during   the   eye-tracking   test,  
participants
focused more on these photos because of predictive coding.

Furthermore,  when  compared  to  Group5,  Group4and  Group10elicited

a higher degree of emotional awakening, although all these groups exhibit over-
seas-Chinese  culture.  Group4and Group10contained  human activities; how-
ever,  Group5did  not.  To  satisfy  the  need  for  social  activities,  
people  will
typically  focus  on  the  human  form:  people’s  faces,  expressions,  and  
behavior
(Hall and others2015; Gregory and others2019). The actions of people produce
meaning  and  people  also  comprehend  space  through  movement  (Thrift  
2000).
Therefore, environments containing humans and human activity attracted more

attention than empty spaces.

The findings for nonresidents indicate that they cannot be expected to spread
overseas-Chinese culture for the following reasons: (1) although the 
architecture
style  of  the1950s  OCC  is  special,  newer  building  styles  are  more  
colorful  and
attractive;  (2)  propaganda  about  overseas-Chinese  culture  and  the  
historically
protected area is insufficient to pique their interest. As a result of 
consumerism,
the discourse constructed by the Internet and media—related to for example, the
villa  district—gradually  overwhelms  the  official  propaganda  discourse;  
and  (3)
the OCC has rarely given presentations of overseas-Chinese culture to commu-
nicate its history. Hence,“overseas-Chinese culture”has been subsumed, even-

tually assuming labels such as“villa district,” “rich district,”and others. At 
the
same  time,  boundaries  between  different  forms  of  culture  have  
increasingly
blurred.  The  analysis  found  that  the  indistinctness  of  physical  forms  
and  the
diversification of labels has led to vague cognition by residents and 
nonresidents
with   regard   to   the   existence   of   the   Guangzhou   OCC   and   its   
historical
significance.

Result Two. The sorting result of the former observation length, first fixation,
and fixation count sums after standardization.

The result indicates that the group of people who have place experience can
successfully focus on key elements in their everyday lives, including memories 
of
the past—for example, architecture which reflects the special history of the 
OCC

of the1950s.  For  returned overseas-Chinese  residents  of Guangzhou,  the  
green
roof in Photo5.3is one of the most powerful representative places of collective
memory,  not  just  for  its  distinctive  architecture,  but  because  it  was 
 also  the

gathering place for childhood play. However, nonoverseas-Chinese residents and
the  general  public  do  not  share  similar  experiences.  Therefore,  in  
contrast  to
returned  overseas-Chinese  residents,  they  exhibit  a  low  emotional  
response  to
the photograph depicting the green roof.

Result Three: The Heatmap

The Heatmap component of the eye-tracker reflects the level of participants’
attraction to specific videos and photos. It maps the former observation length
and  fixation  count  as  a  visual  parameter.  The  length  of  the  duration 
 of  the


FIG.3—The Heatmaps and photos of architecture

participant’s observation at a preset amount of time, directly corresponds to 
the
darkness  level  of  the  area  (Holmqvist  2015).  Excluding  the  invalid  
Heatmap
(where focus is hot scattered, attention is on the text and middle of the 
trees),
we derived16robust Hotspot maps, of which12were mainly for buildings, and
four  for  community  activities.  Four  examples  of  our  Hotspot  maps  are  
below
presented in Figure3 .

Our findings indicate that nonresidents were inclined to focus on windows
and doors in the architecture photos.

I always feel that private villas are very mysterious. When I see their doors 
and windows,
I am tempted to snoop.

—Interview C, a nonresident in Guangzhou; October18,2017

Windows  and  doors  are  the  junctures  between  two  spaces,  and  according 
 to
Thwaites  and  Simkins  (2007),  they  are  likely  to  instinctively  
stimulate  people’s
curiosity and imagination about another unknown space. As a cultural phenom-
enon, architecture has a“society brand”—it transmits social values of an era and
reveals spatial responses to political, economic, and other lifestyles across 
history
(Lees 2001; Jacobs and others2007). The“paradise of returned overseas Chinese”
and“historical  and  cultural  preservation  district”photos  portray  the  
physical
environment  and  landscape  around  buildings  up  until  the1950s.  As  
aesthetic
tastes changed over decades, so did architectural elements representing 
overseas


culture combined with local culture. The fusion of cultural elements is 
difficult
for residents to understand if they are unaware of the special history of the 
OCC.
Examples of the fusion of Chinese returned culture and Lingnan culture include
larger porches with a large, semicircular  balconies, flat roofs, and roof 
gardens

(Guan and others1997). A unique Western courtyard view is also indicative of
the fusion of OCC and Lingnan culture (Wang and Zhao 2015). As a result, new
residents do not experience appreciative emotional feelings linked to buildings 
as

symbols of a past era. Instead, the overall result reflects diverse 
interpretations of
space  for  different  people  and  newcomers.  Eye-tracking  experiment  data  
and
interviews  confirm  that  the  focus  of  people  with  place  experience  is  
different
from those without.

SUMMARY  AND  SUGGESTIONS

The OCC is an important cultural heritage space for returned overseas Chinese,
loaded with the historical spirit and collective memory of the overseas Chinese.
However, our study  has uncovered pitfalls in  its protection. Between2004and

2019,  due   to   urban   development   and   the   departures   of  returned   
overseas

Chinese, the cultural significance of the OCC has weakened to a large extent.

This  result  is  deplorable,  yet,  at  the  same  time  we  can  provide  
some  prag-
matic suggestions for the protection of the OCC. First, architectural features 
that
can  be  protected  include  (1)  places  reflecting  the  collective  life  of 
 returned

overseas Chinese;  (2)  characteristics of  housing architecture  that  are  
important

stimuli;  (3)  windows  and  doors  of  buildings,  which  are  critically  
important.
Features  (1)  and  (2)  can  potentially  awaken  the  collective  memory  of  
returned
the    overseas    Chinese,    and    (3)    is    what    people    will    
pay    attention    to
physiologically.  Second,  depending  on  if  the  OCC  is  a“living”museum  
(for

example,  that  overseas  Chinese  still  reside  in  communities),  more  
relevant
Chinese  activities  should be  organized in  the  OCC  to  inspire current  
residents
to  appreciate  and  better  understand  oversea-Chinese  culture  and  the  
places  it
inhabits.  Third,  heritage  as  a“brand  space”needs  to  be  promoted  via  
news-
papers, social media, and government propaganda.

CONCLUSION

Using the sense of vision as our main approach, we have applied photo assess-
ment,  eye-tracking  experiments,  and  interviews  to  explore  the  
social-spatial
meaning of the Guangzhou“returned overseas Chinese inhabited area”in con-
temporary  China.  The  study  of  the  OCC  presented  here  illustrates  that 
 the
significance  of  cultural  heritage  exists  not  only  in  political  or  
economic  dis-
course, but  is also embodied; in  our case,  we have  particularly emphasized 
the
sense organ of vision, which was applied in a bottom-up construction of cultural
heritage  significance.  However,  cultural  heritage  is  not  immutable—it  
interacts
with  everyday  life,  impacting  place  characteristics  and  infusing  
meaning.  This


paper  has  provided  a  vision-based  mixed  method  in  an  attempt  to  
address
perception  issues  in  cultural  heritage  protection.  Results  show  that  
in  cultural
heritage protection, the visual research method can find or enlarge neglected or
weakened elements, which are often hidden in people’s cognition, emotion, and
memory, presenting rhythmic body performance. This is conducive to  a better
balance  between  stakeholders  and  preserve  the  original  cultural  
significance  of
cultural heritage.

Inspired by“neural turn,”this paper uses the method of eye-tracking experi-
ments that  can allow the body to communicate proactively and transform emo-
tions  from  abstract  into  concrete  (Spinney  2015),  so  that  researchers  
can  obtain
participants’implicit and unconscious true attitudes from a first-person 
perspec-

tive.  It  can  effectively  respond  to  the  research  trend  of  NRT  and  
embodied
cognition  in  human  geography  and  help  to  closely  examine  to  the  
unconscious
mind behind the cultural landscape. While eye-tracking experiments can discover
the  physical  reactions  of  people  in  the  geographical  environment,  they 
 do  not
attribute consciousness, thinking, emotion, and memory to essentialism. Instead,
they discuss the neural process in the context of social culture. Place can 
influence

neural  activities  (Lengen  and  Kistemann  2012;  Pykett  2018).  The  
epistemology

provided  by  neuroscience  and  its  impact  on  society  are  worthy  of  
attention,
especially   for   the   study   of   human’s   implicit,   flowing,   and   
abstract   factors.
Changes  in  the  cultural  landscape  can  be  reflected  in  people’s  
perception  and
behavior, and the perception process of different groups can also reflect 
differences
and inequality of social rights (Gagen 2015). At the same time, innovation of 
this
method can re-understand the relationship between humans and the environment,
set  the  environment  in  a  flowing  and  constantly  changing  cultural  
context,  and
highlight place characteristics in the environment (Pykett 2018).

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The author would like to thank editors and anonymous reviewers who give comments
for the earlier draft of this paper. All errors remain to ourselves.

FUNDING

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 
[41871127,

41701149,81601533].

NOTES

“Villa district”means that all the houses located in this district are large 
and luxurious.

“Bar street”is a place where bars are clustered.

“Fashion place”is a place with a stylish environment and atmosphere.

“Paradise of returned overseas Chinese”is a place in which the returned 
overseas Chinese and
their families will have a happy life.

“Historical and cultural preservation district”is an area that needs protection 
of its appearance
and culture.


“Rich district is where wealthy people live.

“Small Western-style villa”emphasizes that the form of villa in that place is 
of Western style.
“Natural oxygen bar”is a place formed in natural conditions to provide 
sufficient oxygen for
people.

“15-minute living circle”is the area in which residents walk within a15- minute 
period.

“Celebrity gathering place”is where many celebrities live.

REFERENCES

Amin,  H.  M.  T.  M.  2018.  The  Impact  of  Heritage  Decline  on  Urban  
Social  Life.Journal  of
Environmental Psychology55:34–47.

Barnett, C. 2010. Political Affects in Public Space: Normative Blind-spots in 
Non-representational
Ontologies.Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers33(2):186–200.

Beljaars,  D.  2018.Geographies  of  Compulsive  Interactions:  Bodies,  
Objects,  Spaces.  PhD  thesis,

Cardiff University.

Berger, J. 2008.Ways of Seeing. London: British Broadcasting Corporation.

Blake, J. 2000. On Defining the Cultural Heritage.International and Comparative 
Law Quarterly49

(1):61–85.

Bodor, P., and A. Illes. 2008. Possibilities of Analyzing Visual Conduct with 
an Eye Tracker Device:
Searching for Visual Dialects.PoznańStudies in Contemporary 
Linguistics44(2):197–213.

Bowitz,   E.,   and   K.   Ibenholt.   2009.   Economic   Impacts   of   
Cultural   Heritage:   Research  and
Perspectives.Journal of Cultural Heritage10(1):1–8.

Buckley, A. D., ed. 1998.Symbols in Northern Ireland. Belfast: Institute of 
Irish Studies.
Burk, A. L. 2003. Private griefs, public places.Political 
Geography22(3):317–333.

Brunson,  M.  W.,  and  B.  Shelby.  1993.  Recreation  Substitutability:  A  
Research  Agenda.Leisure
Sciences15(1):    67–74.

Clark,   A.   2013.   Expecting   the   World:   Perception,   Prediction,   
and   the   Origins   of   Human
Knowledge.The Journal of Philosophy110(9):469–496.

Creswell,  J.  W.,  and  V.  L.  P.  Clark.2007.Designing and Conducting Mixed 
Methods Research.

London: Sage.

Dadvand,  P.,  J.  Pujol,  D.  Macià,  G.  Martínez-Vilavella,  L.  
Blanco-Hinojo,  M.  Mortamais,  and

M.   López-Vicente.   2018.   The   Association   between   Lifelong   
Greenspace   Exposure   and
3-dimensional    Brain    Magnetic    Resonance    Imaging    in    Barcelona   
 Schoolchildren.
Environmental Health Perspectives126(2):027012.

Davidson,  R.  J.,  and  S.  K.  Sutton.  1995.  Affective  Neuroscience:  The  
Emergence  of  a  Discipline.

Current Opinion in Neurobiology5(2):0–224.

Del Pozo, P. B., and P. A. Gonzalez. 2012. Industrial Heritage and Place 
Identity in Spain: From
Monuments to Landscapes.Geographical Review102(4):446–464.

Dowling,  R.,  K.  Lloyd,  and  S.  Suchet-Pearson.  2018.  Qualitative  
Methods  III:  Experimenting,
Picturing, Sensing.Progress in Human Geography42(5):779–788.

Fitzgerald,  D.,  and  F.  Callard.  2015.  Social  Science  and  Neuroscience  
beyond  Interdisciplinarity:
Experimental Entanglements.Theory, Culture & Society32(1):3–32.

Fitzgerald, S. 1972.China and the Overseas Chinese: A Study of Peking’s 
Changing Policy,1949–1970.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Gagen, E. A. 2015. Governing Emotions: Citizenship, Neuroscience and the 
Education of Youth.

Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers40(1):140–152.

García-Hernández, M., M. de la Calle-Vaquero, and C. Yubero. 2017. Cultural 
Heritage and Urban
Tourism: Historic City Centres under Pressure.Sustainability9(8):1346.

Gładziejewski, P. 2016. Predictive Coding and 
Representationalism.Synthese193(2):559–582.

Guan,  D.,  C.  Qin,  Y.  Chen,  and  Y.  Xie.1997.  Tree  and  Landscape  of  
the  House  Gardens  in  a
Low-density Residential Quarter of Huaqiao Xincun of Guangzhou.Geographical 
Research16
(4):63–70.

Guangzhou Famous City Office. 2006.Overseas-Chinese Village Historical Cultural 
Protection Area
Protecting Plan. Guangzhou Municipal Planning and Natural Resouces Bureau 
[https://www.
gzlpc.gov.cn/gzlpc/ywpd_cxgh_ghxg_ztgh/200608/553d1182ea3042e6afcb78584807bb9d.s
html]


Guangzhou   Local   Records   Committee.   2009.Guangzhou  History.   
Guangzhou:   Guangzhou
Publishing House.

Graham, B. 2002. Heritage as Knowledge: Capital or Culture?Urban 
Studies39(5–6):1003–1017.
Greenwald,  A.  G.,  M.  R.  and  Banaji.  1995.  Implicit  Social  Cognition:  
Attitudes,  Self-esteem,  and

Stereotypes.Psychological Review102(1):4–27.

Gregory, N. J., H. Bolderston, and J. V. Antolin.2019. Attention to Faces and 
Gaze-following in
Social Anxiety: Preliminary Evidence from a Naturalistic Eye-tracking 
Investigation.Cognition
and Emotion33(5):931–942.

Hall, S. S., M. C. Frank, G. T. Pusiol, F. Farzin, A. A. Lightbody, and A. L. 
Reiss.2015. Quantifying

Naturalistic  Social  Gaze  in  Fragile  X  Syndrome  Using  a  Novel  
Eye-tracking  Paradigm.

American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: Neuropsychiatric 
Genetics168(7):564–572.

Harvey, D. C. 2001. Heritage Pasts and Heritage Presents: Temporality, Meaning 
and the Scope of
Heritage Studies.International Journal of Heritage Studies7(4):319–338.

Harrison,  R.  2015.  Heritage  and  Globalisation.  InThe  Palgrave  Handbook  
of  Contemporary
Heritage  Research,  edited  by  E.  Waterton  and  S.  Watson,297–312.  
Basingstoke:  Palgrave
Macmillian.

Hoelscher,   S.,   and   D.   H.   Alderman.   2004.   Memory   and   Place:   
Geographies   of   a   Critical
Relationship.Social & Cultural Geography5(3):347–355.

Holmqvist,  K.  2015.Eye-tracking:  A  Comprehensive  Guide  to  Methods  and  
Measures  .  Oxford:

Oxford University Press.

Hu, Z., and Y. Lin. 2006.Environmental Psychology. Beijing: China Architecture 
& Building Press.
Jacobs, J. M., S. Cairns, and I. Strebel.2007. A Tall Storey, but a Fact just 
the Same: The Red Road

High-rise as a Black Box.Urban Studies44(3):609–629.

Kavaratzis, M. 2004. From City Marketing to City Branding: Towards a 
Theoretical Framework for
Developing City Brands.Place Branding1(1):58–73.

Kiefer, P., F. Straub, and M. Raubal. 2012.Location-aware Mobile Eye-tracking 
for the Explanation
of  Wayfinding  Behavior.  AGILE’2012International  Conference  on  Geographic  
Information
Science. Avignon: France. April.

Korf,  B.  2008.  A  Neural  Turn?  On  the  Ontology  of  the  Geographical  
Subject.Environment and
Planning A40(3):715–732.

Lees,  L.  2001.  Towards  a  Critical  Geography  of  Architecture:  The  Case 
 of  an  Ersatz  Colosseum.

Ecumene8(1):51–86.

Lengen, C., and T. Kistemann. 2012. Sense of Place and Place Identity: Review 
of Neuroscientific
Evidence.Health & Place18(5):1162–1171.

Lenzerini, F. 2011. Intangible Cultural Heritage: The Living Culture of 
Peoples.European Journal of
International Law22(1):101–120.

Longhurst, R. 1997. (Dis)embodied Geographies.Progress in Human Geography21(4   
 ):486–501.
Lorimer,   H.  2005.  Cultural  Geography:   The  Busyness  of   Being  
More-than-representational.

Progress in Human Geography29(1):83–94.

Lowenthal,  D.  1985.The  Past  Is  a  Foreign  Country  Revisited.  Cambridge, 
 U.K.:  Cambridge
University Press.

Marschall,  S.  2006.  Visualizing  Memories:  The  Hector  Pieterson  Memorial 
 in  Soweto.Visual
Anthropology19(2):145–169.

McDowell,  S.  2008.  Heritage,  Memory  and  Identity.  InThe  Ashgate  
Research  Companion  to
Heritage and Identity. Edited by B. Graham andP. Howard,37–53. Aldershot: 
Ashgate.

Mitchell,  D.  2001.  The  Lure  of  the  Local:  Landscape  Studies  at  the  
End  of  a  Troubled  Century.

Progress in Human Geography25(2):269–281.

Nikielska-Sekula,  K.  2016.  The  Role  of  Cultural  Heritage  in  the  
Development  of  the  Sense  of
Belonging  among  Young  Norwegian-Turks:  Boundary  Making  and  Crossing.The  
Age  of
Human Rights Journal7:96–119.

            2019.  Migrating  Heritage?  Recreating  Ancestral  and  New  
Homeland  Heritage  in  the
Practices of Immigrant Minorities.International Journal of Heritage 
Studies:1–15.

Osborne, T. and P. Jones. 2017. Biosensing and Geography: A Mixed Methods 
Approach.Applied
Geography87:160–169

Peterson, G. 2013.Overseas Chinese in the People’s Republic of China. London: 
Routledge.


Proffitt,   D.   R.   2006.   Embodied   Perception   and   the   Economy   of  
 Action.Perspectives  on
Psychological Science1(2):110–122.

Pykett,  J.  2018.  Geography  and  Neuroscience:  Critical  Engagements  with  
Geography’s‘Neural
Turn.’Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers43(2):154–169.

Roberts, A. C., G. I. Christopoulos, J. Car, C. K. Soh, and M. Lu. 2016. 
Psycho-biological Factors

Associated  with  Underground  Spaces:  What  Can  the  New  Era  of  Cognitive 
 Neuroscience
Offer to Their Study?Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology55:118–134.

Rose,  G.  2002.Visual  Methodologies:  An  Introduction  to  Researching  with 
 Visual  Materials.

London: Sage.

Shackel, P. A., and D. T. Pitcaithley. 2003.Memory in Black and White: Race, 
Commemoration, and
the Post-Bellum Landscape. Walnut Creek, Calif.: AltaMira Press.

Spinney, J. 2015. Close Encounters? Mobile Methods, (Post)Phenomenology and 
Affect.Cultural
Geographies22(2):231–246.

Steadman, R. C. 2002. Toward a Social Psychology of Place: Predicting Behavior 
from Place-based
Cognitions, Attitude, and Identity.Environment and Behavior34:561–581.

Stokols,  D.,  and  S.  A.  Shumaker.  1981.  People  in  Places:  A  
Transactional  View  of  Settings.  In
Cognition, Social Behavior, and the Environment, edited by J. H. 
Harvey,441–488. Hillsdale, N.
J.: Erlbaum.

Su,  R.,  B.  Bramwell,  and  P.  A.  Whalley.  2018.  Cultural  Political  
Economy  and  Urban  Heritage
Tourism.Annals of Tourism Research68:30–40.

Thrift, N. 2000. Afterwords.Environment and Planning D: Society and 
Space18(2):213–255.

           2007.Non-Representational Theory: Space, Politics, Affect. London: 
Routledge.

Thwaites,  K.,  and  I.  Simkins.  2007.Experiential  Landscape:  An  Approach  
to  People,  Place  and
Space. London: Routledge.

Till, K. E. 1999. Staging the Past: Landscape Designs, Cultural Identity and 
Erinnerungspolitik at
Berlin’s Neue Wache.Ecumene6(3):251–283.

Vannini, P. 2015. Non-representational Ethnography: New Ways of Animating 
Lifeworlds.Cultural
Geographies22(2):317–327.

Wang, M., and Zhao, M. 2015. The Historic Quarter’s Revitalization from the 
Perspective of Spatial

Production  Theory:  Case  Study  of  the  Overseas  Chinese  Village  in  
Guangzhou.Journal of
South China Normal University (Natural Science Edition)47(2):124–133.

Wang,  Y.,  and  Sparks,  B.  A.  2016.  An  Eye-tracking  Study  of  Tourism  
Photo  Stimuli:  Image
Characteristics and Ethnicity.Journal of Travel Research55(5):588–602.

Whelan,  Y.  F.  2005.  Mapping  Meanings  in  the  Cultural  Landscape.  
InSenses of Place, Senses of
Time, edited by G. J. Ashworth,61–72. London: Ashgate Publishing Ltd.

Zhao, M., and M. Wang. 2016. Overseas Chinese Architecture Morphology and 
Reconstruction of
Patriarchal  Clan  Locality:  A  Study  on  Architectural  Geography  of  Chen  
Cihong’s  Former
Residence.Tropical Geography36(2):     198–207.

View publication stats

