Accelerat ing t he world's research.

The museum learning experience
through the visitors' eyes: An eye
tracking exploration of the physical
context

Joanne Yu, Barbara Neuhofer, Mattia Rainoldi

Eye Tracking in Tourism

Cite this paper

Downloaded from Academia.edu 

Get the citation in MLA, APA, or Chicago styles

Related papers

Download a PDF Pack of t he best  relat ed papers 

Mobile Eyet racking of Museum Learning Experiences

Barbara Neuhofer, Mat t ia Rainoldi

Exploring t he pot ent ial cont ribut ion of mobile eye-t racking t echnology in enhancing t he museum visit  …

Moayad Mokat ren

Hasslily Hashim

UNDERSTANDING EXHIBIT ION EXPERIENCE: A USER-CENT RED APPROACH T O DESIGNING ENGAGING A…

The museum learning experience through the visitors’ eyes: An eye tracking 
exploration of the physical context 
 

Mattia Rainoldi, Chung-En Yu and Barbara Neuhofer 

 

Abstract  

Experiences always need to be designed with the visitor in mind. In our society, 
museums hold a prominent place for human learning and experiences. Museum 
experiences  have  become  a  sophisticated  blend  of  spatial  design,  exhibit 
curation and multimedia selection, shaping the overall physical context of the 
visitor’s  experience.  Driven  by  the  question  of  how  we  can  create  effective 
visitor learning experiences in contemporary museums, a large-scale mobile eye 
tracking  was  conducted.  Mobile  eye  tracking  has  recently  entered  tourism 
research as a novel method to study visitor behaviour in real-life environments 
and  in  a  non-intrusive  manner.  The  findings  reveal  that  the  physical  context 
greatly  influences  the  museum  learning  experience,  and  show  significant 
differences in attention and engagement levels across exhibition’s elements. The 
study  adds  insights  on  the  relationship  between  visitors’  museum  learning 
processes and the physical context, and contributes to the model of contextual 
learning. Practical implications for museum experience design are offered with 
regards to spatial experience design and different visitor age segments. 

Keywords: museum, learning experience, mobile eye tracking. 

1 Introduction 

Museums  offer  liminal  spaces  that  invite  visitors  to  have  engaging  learning 
experiences.  While  experiences  unfold,  it  has  been  common  knowledge  that 
maintaining visitors’ attention in art galleries, exhibitions and museums is not 
an easy task due to museum fatigue and satiation (Antón, Camarero, & Garrido, 
2018; Germak & Khan, 2017). The former refers to a predictable tiredness that 
leads  to  the  decrease  of  interests  during  the  visit  (Davey,  2005).  The  latter 

Mattia Rainoldi, Salzburg University of Applied Sciences, Puch, Austria  
e-mail: mattia.rainoldi@fh-salzburg.ac.at 
Chung-En Yu, Salzburg University of Applied Sciences, Puch, Austria  
e-mail: cyu.imte-m2018@fh-salzburg.ac.at  
Barbara Neuhofer, Salzburg University of Applied Sciences, Puch, Austria  
e-mail: barbara.neuhofer@fh-salzburg.ac.at 

suggests  a  lack  of  attention  resulting  from  the  repeated  exposure  to  similar 
stimuli (Antón et al., 2018). Since visitors often spend the same amount of time 
centered on exhibits during the visit (Rainoldi, Neuhofer, & Jooss, 2018), one 
central question for the design of these spaces (Hein, 1998) is how to effectively 
facilitate  learning  experiences.  With  the  advancement  in  information  and 
communication  technologies  (ICTs),  institutions  and  organisations  have 
attempted to transform learning activities from traditional printed materials to 
technology-enabled formats (Pachman, Arguel, Lockyer, Kennedy, & Lodge, 
2016).  This  is  supported  by  a  number  of  studies  showcasing  that  digital 
materials are valuable to learning and teaching (McGuinness & Fulton, 2019; 
Henderson, Selwyn, & Aston, 2017; Zwart, Van Luit, Noroozi, & Goei, 2017). 
As  opposed  to  traditional  media  that  are  static  in  nature,  technology-driven 
elements attract higher levels of interest and attention (Venkatraman, Dimoka, 
Vo,  &  Pavlou,  2018),  and  have  been  used  as  an  effective  tool  to  serve 
educational purposes (Henderson, Selwyn, & Aston, 2017).  

In the same vein, physical gallery spaces and museums have incorporated digital 
technology to aid visitor experiences by facilitating the learning process (Pallud, 
2017)  and  improving  visitor  engagement  levels  (Kounaves,  Archer,  King,  & 
Pegram,  2016).  Well-known  examples  can  be  seen  from  the  application  of 
interactive technologies in the Louvre Museum, Brooklyn Museum, and British 
Museum,  among  others.  To  effectively  combine  the  old  and  the  new,  it  is 
necessary to investigate the interaction between visitors and the physical context 
of an exhibition (Falk & Dierking, 2013). While doing so, one also needs to bear 
in  mind  various  visitor  profiles,  such  as  age  differences  and  technology 
preferences.  Younger  consumers  are  often  characteristics  as  tech-savvy, 
whereas older consumers might be reluctant to using technology-related objects 
(Douglas,  Lubbe,  &  Van  Rooye,  2018).  Therefore,  museum  experience 
designers  have  to  strategically  create  a  diversified,  interactive  and  engaging 
platform for visitors (Falk & Dierking, 2013).  

If achieved, a positive museum experience could not only enhance the visitor 
satisfaction and revisit intentions (Kang, Jang, & Jeong, 2018), but also improve 
the  extent  of learning  capability  (Pallud,  2017).  Notably,  earlier  research  has 
applied the Contextual Model of Learning (Falk & Storksdieck, 2005; Lundgren 
& Crippen, 2019; Hsu & Liang, 2017; Rainoldi, Neuhofer, & Jooss, 2018), as a 
suitable  framework  to  study  the  complexities  of  the  museum  experience  at  a 
socio-cultural, personal and physical level (Falk & Dierking, 2013). This study 
has an interest in the physical context that is inextricably related to the design 
of museum learning experiences. 

 

To investigate visitors’ attention during the visit, the application of mobile eye 
tracking  glasses  has  gained  increasing  popularity  in  tourism  research  (Scott, 
Zhang,  Le,  &  Moyle,  2019)  as  it  allows  natural  movement  in  real-world 
situations.  For  instance,  Mokatren,  Kuflik  and  Shimshoni  (2016)  explore  the 
role of mobile eye trackers in enhancing the museum visitor experience. More 
recently, the study of Krogh-Jespersen, Quinn, Krenzer, Nguyen, Greenslit and 
Price  (2020)  investigates  visitors’  visual  attention  in  a  science  museum  and 
discover that the position of signage is related to the feeling of connectedness 
within an exhibition space. Nonetheless, given the potential benefits of mobile 
eye tracking, research on visitor real-life experiences is still in its infancy, not 
to mention the generational differences between visitors in the museum context. 

Therefore, the current study aims to tackle the research gap by investigating the 
museum  experience  of  visitors  in  different  age  groups.  Specifically,  this 
research  seeks  to  uncover  the  effectiveness  of  space  design  by  examining 
different elements of an exhibition (e.g. textual information boards, traditional 
exhibits, and digital materials). By bridging the interdisciplinary fields of visual 
attention,  contextual 
theory,  experience  design  and  museum 
management, this research provides additional knowledge to the body of mobile 
eye  tracking  research  in  the  context  of  tourism.  Practically,  it  highlights  the 
importance of effective object and space design for museums to provide a flow 
experience for visitors. 

learning 

2 Literature review  

2.1 The importance of visual attention 

Attracting  visual  attention  has  been  a  key  topic  in  the  domain  of  tourism 
research (Wang & Sparks, 2016; Scott et al., 2019). Specifically, visual attention 
refers to one’s cognitive processing in filtering out the irrelevant information 
from  all  the  visual  elements  (Kastner  &  Pinsk,  2004).  Notably,  humans’  eye 
movements are largely influenced by the nature of objects. For instance, pictures 
are more visually appealing than text (Lin, Swarna, & Bruning, 2017), whereas 
traditional  static  materials 
digital  contents  are  more  attractive 
(Venkatraman  et  al.,  2018).  In  the  age  of  the  Internet,  the  application  of 
technological-driven  materials  gains  its  popularity  not  only  in  marketing  and 
advertising (Venkatraman et al., 2018; Beck, Rainoldi, & Egger, 2019), but also 
in education (McGuinness & Fulton, 2019) and experience design (Neuhofer, 

than 

 

Buhalis, & Ladkin, 2014; Rainoldi et al., 2018). Specific to the tourism field, 
visual attention plays a crucial role in information retention (Goulding, 2000) 
sightseeing,  and  interpretation  (Scott  et  al.,  2019).  Additionally,  the  overall 
tourism  experiences  can  be  largely  affected  by  attracting  and  holding  one’s 
attention  (Ooi,  2003).  Similarly,  other  scholars  highlighted  the  need  in 
managing  distractions  within  an  environment  to  allow  a  more  pleasant 
experience (Ooi, 2003; Ellis & Rossman, 2008; Wagler & Hanus, 2018). Since 
eye movements often occur at an unconscious level (Kastner & Pinsk, 2004), it 
is nearly impossible to study visitors’ gaze attention with traditional research 
techniques, such as surveys or interviews (Scott et al., 2019). Recent research 
has therefore opened more experiential methods, and adopted eye tracking tools 
as an emerging technology in this particular context (Eghbal-Azar & Widlok, 
2012; Schwan et al., 2020; Filippini-Fantoni et al., 2013). 

While the study of visual attentions is not new in other disciplinary, areas such 
as  psychology  or  neuroscience,  it  is  only  recently  that  tourism  research  is 
embracing the benefits of the eye tracking technique (Scott et al., 2019). Apart 
from a more conventional practice to study tourists’ eye movement in laboratory 
settings (Pachman et al., 2016), a wearable eye tracker is designed to capture 
natural  gaze  cues  in  real-life  situations,  such  as  in  retail  shops  (Huddleston, 
Behe,  Minahan,  &  Fernandez,  2015),  urban  environments 
(Kiefer, 
Giannopoulos, & Raubal, 2014), cultural heritage locations (Mokatren, Kuflik, 
&  Shimshoni,  2018),  and  museums  (Mokatren  et  al.,  2016;  Rainoldi  et  al., 
2018).  In  response  to  numerous  product  and  object  presentations  nowadays, 
designers have to be aware of the selective attention resulting from the mental 
fatigue  and  satiation  (Antón,  Camarero,  &  Garrido,  2018;  Germak  &  Khan, 
2017).  Earlier  research  underpinned  that  insights  from  visual  attention  could 
improve mobile learning (Mayr, Knipfer, & Wessel, 2009), and enhance visitor 
experiences (Mokatren et al., 2016). A typical example where tourism spaces 
have  been  designed  with  an  educational  purpose  in  mind  are  museums 
(Trofanenko,  2010).  Greater  importance  should  therefore  be  attached  to  the 
learning-museum relationship in order to facilitate the overall visitor experience 
(Rainoldi et al., 2018). 

2.2 Visitors’ gazes in the museum context 

Museums  are  vital  public  spaces  collecting  and  preserving  historical  and 
cultural  objects  (Falk  &  Dierking,  2013),  and  improving  social  cohesion.  By 
connecting  past  and  contemporary  events,  museums  also  play  a  key  role  in 
learning  and  educational  purposes  (Trofanenko,  2010).  As  one  can  imagine, 

 

arranging the collection of artefacts in different rooms and exhibitions has been 
a  crucial  task  for  the  designers.  What  is  equally  important  is  to  facilitate  the 
individual learning experiences through an effective visitor flow (Hein, 1998; 
Falk & Dierking, 2013). Experiences by nature are however highly subjective 
at the time of their occurrence, and when evaluated (Neuhofer et al., 2014). This 
means human-centred design it is critical for individual differences to be taken 
into consideration. Individual visitor interests and preferences are far from being 
the same. For instance, Holdgaard (2012) revealed that older visitors are more 
interested in cultural heritage while younger visitors show a higher interest in 
natural  history.  Strohmaier,  Sprung,  Nischelwitzer  and  Schadenbauer  (2015) 
suggest that visitor paths visualization can be an effective way to help museum 
professionals improve the design of experiences. Similarly, a plethora of studies 
discussed the relationship between visitor movements and visitor experiences 
(Yoshimura  et  al.,  2014;  Yoshimura,  Sinatra,  Krebs,  &  Ratti,  2019; 
Tsiropoulou, Thanou, & Papavassiliou, 2017). The artefacts that attract visitors’ 
attention thus become the fundamental elements in influencing one’s learning 
and  the  overall  experience  (Bitgood,  2006),  which  subsequently  affects  the 
satisfaction,  revisit  intentions  (Kang  et  al.,  2018),  and  the  recommendation 
intention of the museum (Zanibellato, Rosin, & Casarin, 2018).  

With the gaining popularity of eye tracking research, this technique offers real-
time  information  on  an  individual’s  perceptions  and  behaviors  (Scott  et  al., 
2019). In particular, wearable eye trackers have been applied in various real-life 
situations (Huddleston et al., 2015; Mokatren et al., 2018; Rainoldi et al., 2018). 
Although  its  application  in  the  museum  context  could  be  traced  back  to  the 
1980s (Buquet et al., 1988), the complexity and sophistication of eye tracking 
technology in place today provides more valuable insights into visual attention 
and attentional processes (Knight et al., 2014). For instance, Mayr et al. (2009) 
discovered  a  pattern  where  visitors  tend  to  scan  across  the  exhibition  walls 
before exploring a single artefact according to their interests. When focusing on 
an individual level, Filippini-Fantoni, Jaebker, Bauer and Stofer (2013) found 
out that physical objects, photographic substitutes, attract more attention from 
younger  visitors.  Other  than  that,  while  intuition  may  suggest  that  textual 
information is generally undesirable, a recent study claims that adults around 40 
years  old  tend  to  perform  deep  reading  once  they  notice  the  description 
presented around the artefacts (Schwan, Gussmann, Gerjets, Drecoll, & Feiber, 
2020).  However,  it  must  be  noted  that  most  museum  studies  focus  on  very 
homogenous  age  group  samples  (Bartneck,  Masuoka,  Takahashi,  &  Fukaya, 
2007),  which  limits  the  understanding  of  how  people  in  different  age  groups 

 

undergo their learning experiences. Afterall, mobile eye tracking technology has 
the  potential  to  uncover  visitors’  unconscious  mind,  which  can  barely  be 
described  by  themselves  (Eghbal  &  Widlok,  2012).  Echoing  the  relation 
between visual behaviors and learning experiences (Mayr et al., 2009), it is thus 
necessary to deepen the understanding regarding which specific elements can 
facilitate the learning process in museums.    

2.3 Contextual model of learning 

In a free-choice setting condition, individuals’ attention spans can be influenced 
by  a  wider  socio-cultural  and  personal  level  (Dunlop,  Clarke,  &  McKelvey-
Martin, 2019). To investigate learning behaviours in the museum context, Falk 
and  Dierking  (2004)  developed  the  Contextual  Model  of  Learning.  The 
framework  covers  three  interrelated  factors  that  influence  visitor  learning; 
namely,  the  socio-cultural  context,  the  personal  context,  and  the  physical 
context. Specifically, socio-cultural dimensions refer to the interactions between 
one  another,  whereas  personal  contexts 
interests, 
backgrounds,  and  motivations  toward  the  exhibition  (Falk  &  Storksdieck, 
2005). Lastly, physical contexts relate  to the orientation of the space  and the 
design of exhibits (Falk & Storksdieck, 2005). With a particular interest of the 
present  study,  it  is  the  physical  elements  of  an  exhibition  that  are  the  most 
influential  toward  a  visitor’s  overall  experience  (Falk  &  Dierking,  2013). 
Nevertheless,  one  needs  to  bear  in  mind  that  none  of  the  contexts  remain 
constant throughout time and that there is an on-going interaction between all 
three elements (Falk & Storksdieck, 2005) 

individuals’ 

imply 

Earlier  literature  has  underpinned  the  Contextual  Model  of  Learning  as  a 
theoretical framework in analysing museum learning experiences. For instance, 
Hsu, Liang, Chiou and Tseng (2018) applied the model to examine children’s 
learning behaviours in a museum embedded in a virtual game. Moreover, Hsu 
and  Liang  (2017)  discovered  that  physical  sources  and  social  interactions 
positively influence visitor satisfaction and motivation for continuous learning. 
With regards to the physical environments that can be controlled by museum 
professionals, it is worth noting that elements that are large in size and create 
multisensory  experiences  are  the  most  memorable  ones  (Anderson  &  Lucas, 
1997).  Other  scholars  pointed  out  that  learning  experiences  are  strongly 
influenced by the orientation of the physical environment, including the large-
scale  objects  and  the  detailed  information  contained  within  it  (Falk  & 
Storksdieck, 2005). Another study highlights the fact that the distance between 
the  artefacts  and  the  visitors  should  be  carefully  planned  to  allow  a  positive 

 

outcome  (Bartneck,  Masuoka,  Takahashi,  &  Fukaya,  2006).  To  facilitate  the 
learning process through digital products, the study of Bartneck et al. (2007) 
reveals  a  surprising  result  where  visitors’  age  difference  did  not  affect  their 
usage. Yet, it appears that the elderly demonstrates a sense of difficulty when 
using  the  digital  technology  in  the  museum  context  (Bartneck  et  al.,  2007). 
Nevertheless,  given  that  the  interaction  between  visitors  and  artefacts  in  a 
museum environment is critical, it is the purpose of this research to address the 
existing gap and understand the relationship between the physical context and 
the  learning  experience,  and  how  age  differences  could  affect  visitors’ 
experiences in a museum context. 

3 Methodology  

Since  the  museum  learning  experience  appears  to  be  influenced  from  the 
physical context and that the way individuals interact with the museum textual 
information, physical and digital elements seem to be shaped by one’s age, this 
study aim was to unlock an in-depth understanding of learning processes on-site 
through an analysis of visual attention.  

3.1 Sampling and data collection  

For  this  study,  participants  were  recruited  in  the  entrance  hall  of  Salzburg 
Museum  over  a  three-month  period,  between  June  and  August  2016.  A 
purposive  sampling  strategy  was  adopted  for  the  recruitment  of  museum 
visitors.  Visitors  selected  to  take  part  in  the  study  were  required  to  a)  have 
knowledge of the German language, b) have no visual impairment and c) being 
first-time  visitors  of  the  exhibition  ‘Bischof.  Kaiser.  Jedermann.’.  The 
exhibition focused on Salzburg’s history and development from Roman times 
to today from the perspective of the local population.  

Suitable  participants  were  asked  to  take  a  screening  survey  to  assess  their 
motivation  for  the  visit.  Based  on  the  Falk  and  Dierking’s  (2013)  seven 
typologies  of  museum  visitors  the  aim  of  such  survey  was  to  identify  those 
‘explorers’ visitors whose visit was motivated by interest in the content of the 
exhibition and desire for learning. Following the selection processes 41 visitors 
volunteered to take part in the study.  

Participants  equipped  with  Tobii  Pro  Glasses  2  were  instructed  -  after  the 
calibration  of  the  eye  tracking  glasses  -  to  independently  walk  through  the 
exhibition at their own natural pace and according to their own personal interests 

 

and learning objectives. To guarantee a natural learning experience participant 
were allowed to enjoy their museum visit together with eventual accompanying 
people. Tobii Pro Glasses 2 was chosen as data collection tool because of its 
wearability enables participants to move freely and experience the museum in 
an unrestricted manner and in a natural environment. As a result, it enabled to 
attain  an  ecologically  valid  (Bojko  2013)  dynamic  snapshot  the  museum 
learning experience by capturing the participants’ gaze as they move through 
the  context  in  which  they  are  immersed  through  the  combination  of  a  scene 
camera and infrared sensors.  

Finally,  a  post-survey  was  used  to  collect  demographic  data  as  well  as  data 
regarding  participants’  overall  museum  experience.  Eye-tracking  recordings 
were screened to ensure completeness and accuracy before been processed and 
analysed in the Tobii Glasses Analyzer. Seven recordings needed to be excluded 
from the final analysis, due to incompleteness of the recordings or calibration 
inaccuracies. 

3.2 Data Analysis 

As museums are environments extremely rich on written information, objects, 
engaging media and interactives (Falk and Dierking, 2013) the process of data 
analysis focused on what attracts visual attention thorough an investigation of 
visitors’ fixations. A fixation is thereby defined as a short pause between eye 
movements in which the attention is focused on a specific area of the visual field 
(Duchowski,  2007).  Fixation  times  are  of  particular  interest  for  assessing 
learning  processes,  because  the  length  of  a  fixation  is  indicative  of  the  brain 
information processing and cognitive activity that occurs at a particular moment 
in time (Bojko 2013).  

Thus, for the purpose of this study the fixations of 34 participants were analysed 
in  the  four  following  steps.  First  the  214.263  recorded  fixations  (Ø  6.301) 
extracted  from  over  25  hours  of  data  (Ø  45’23’’)  where  mapped  against  the 
museum  floor  plan  of  the  six  analysed  rooms  on  which  each  element  of  the 
exhibition was previously categorized in following AOIs (Areas of Interest): a) 
exhibition’s information board, b) room’s information board, c) exhibits case’ 
information board, d) exhibits, e) video screens, and f) touchscreens. Figure 1 
demonstrates on the example of Room 1 the categorization of the exhibition’s 
elements into thematical AOIs. 

 

Figure 1. AOIs Room 1 

 

Second, a) time to first fixation (TFF), b) total fixation duration (TFD), and c) 
average fixation duration (AFD) eye-tracking metrics were generated to explore 
by means of descriptive statistics to appreciate differences in visual attention 
across exhibitions elements (see Table 1). Third, based on these initial statistical 
results, a correlation matrix was computed to graphically present the different 
typologies of exhibitions’ elements and their related eye tracking metrics as well 
as  to  visualise  correlations  between  exhibition’s  elements  (see  Figure  2). 
Finally, to discern any significant differences existing between, visual attention 
on the different exhibition’s elements and participant’s age (based on percentile) 
a series of one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted. 

4 Results  

4.1 Descriptive statistics  

The analysed data were collected from 34 museum learning ‘explores’ (14 males 
and 20 females), ranging from an age of 17 to 80. Participants were categorized 
into  three  different  age  groups  based  on  percentiles,  including  13  younger 
adults, 10 adults, and 11 older adults. The age range of younger adults is 17 to 
29, whereas adults is 30 to 49. Older adults were ranged between 50 to 80 years 

 

old. The overall descriptive statistics of different eye tracking measures on the 
designated  AOIs  are  presented  in  Table  1.  The  results  show  that  most 
participants first look at the exhibition’s information board with an average of 
0.22 ms, which is placed at the entrance of Room 1. Next, the data reveal that 
participants tend to look into the general description first when they enter the 
rooms with differences between features. When comparing digital materials and 
exhibits, it appears that touchscreens had the shortest TFF from stimulus onset, 
followed by video screens and exhibits. Given that, touchscreens had the highest 
average  TFF  (195.52  ms).  This  implies  that  there  might  be  only  a  group  of 
museum  learners  that  notice  the  touchscreens  at  the  very  beginning.  With 
regards to the TFD, the results suggest that participants spent the longest time 
with video screens, exhibits, and touchscreens. However, the information board 
of different exhibits appears to be the least attractive. Lastly, the results imply 
that the AFD is similar across the AOIs, with video screens having the highest 
AFD. Interestingly, the AFD of touchscreens, as digital materials, was the same 
as the textual description (e.g. exhibits case’ information board).  

Table 1. Descriptive statistics of eye tracking metrics 

 
 

TFF 
[Min, Max] 

TFD 

 
  M  

Exhibits 

[38.08, 349.45] 

Exhibition’s information board 

[0, 4.10] 

Exhibits case’s information board 

[20.03, 333.39] 

Room’s information board 

[2.13, 182.50] 

Video screens 

Touchscreens 

[26.33, 222.40] 

[18.84, 598.90] 

M  
(SD) 
139.99  
(69.81) 
0.22  
(0.76) 
160.06  
(88.18) 
39.08  
(36.06) 
111.95  
(55.70) 
195.52 
(123.09) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(SD) 
35.50  
(21.47) 
24.76  
(15.20) 
13.60  
(6.74) 
22.01  
(10.38) 
45.58  
(33.33) 
33.25  
(26.54) 

AFD 
M  
(SD) 
0.23  
(0.05) 
0.22  
(0.05) 
0.20  
(0.05) 
0.22  
(0.05) 
0.29  
(0.06) 
0.20  
(0.05) 

Note: TFF=Time to First Fixation; TFD=Total Fixation Duration; AFD=Average Fixation 
Duration; time in millisecond 
 
4.2 Main analysis  

Overall,  the  relationship  between  the  eye  tracking  metrics  of  the  designated 
AOIs are presented in Figure 2. Color transparency suggests the strength and 
direction of correlation between two variables. Higher transparency implies a 
weaker  relationship.  A  negative  correlation  is  presented  by  blue;  a  positive 

 

correlation is presented by red; a correlation closed to zero is indicated by white. 
The results demonstrate that three eye tracking measures of the exhibits were 
(strongly) positively correlated with the eye tracking measures of the exhibits 
case’ information board. However, it appears that the eye tracking metrics of 
video  screens and touchscreens were (slightly) negatively  correlated with the 
eye tracking metrics of the general exhibition’s information board. Yet, since it 
is unclear if the museum learners’ eye attention would be different when taking 
the age into account, further analysis was carried out.  

Figure 2. Visual representation of correlation between different AOIs 

Note:  TFF=  Time  to  First  Fixation;  TFD=  Total  Fixation  Duration;  AFD= 
Average  Fixation  Duration;  time  in  millisecond;  Exb_Information_Board= 
Exhibition’s information board; InfoBoard= Exhibits case’ information board; 
RoomInfoBoard= Room’s information board; video= video screens.  

 

 

 
To  investigate  the  effectiveness  of  various  types  of  materials  in  the  museum 
based on the museum learners’ age difference, this study performed several one-
way ANOVAs. First, with regards to the exhibits, the results suggest that there 
was no significant difference on the TFF, F(2, 31) = .841, p = .441, TDF,  F(2, 
31) = .820, p = .450 and ADF,  F(2, 31) = .263, p = .771. Likewise, there was 
no  significant  difference  for  the  exhibits  case’  information  boards  on  the 
TFF, F(2, 31) = 1.376, p = .268, TDF,  F(2, 31) = 2.430, p = .105 and ADF,  F(2, 
31) = .881, p = .424. Nonetheless, a significant result existed on the AFD of the 
general information boards of the exhibit, F(2, 31) = 5.749, p = .008; yet, not on 
the  TFF,  F(2,  31)  =  1.268, p =  .296  and  TDF,  F(2,  31)  =  .694, p =  .507. 
Specifically,  Tukey  post  hoc  analysis  revealed  that  the  AFD  was  statistically 
significant  between  younger  adults  and  older  adults  (p  =  .008)  as  well  as 
between adults and older adults (p = .043), where older adults had the highest 
AFD,  followed  by  adults,  and  younger  adults.  Nevertheless,  for  the  room’s 
information  boards,  there  was  no  statistically  significant  difference  on  the 
TFF, F(2, 31) = 1.570, p = .224, TDF,  F(2, 31) = 1.465, p = .247 and ADF,  F(2, 
31) = 2.523, p = .097. 

The analysis proceeded further to examine digital objects. In the case of digital 
materials, the results showed that there was a significant difference for the TFD 
of video screens, F(2, 31) = 4.561, p = .018 and the TFD of touchscreens, F(2, 
31) = 6.459, p = .005. In particular, the TFD of video screens was statistically 
significant  between  younger  adults  and  adults  (p  =  .030),  but  no other  group 
differences were significantly different. Overall, adults had the longest TFD on 
video screens, followed by older adults, and younger adults. On the other hand, 
the  TFD  of  touchscreens  was  statistically  significant  between  younger  adults 
and adults (p = .005) and between younger adults and older adults (p = .049). 
Similarly, adults had the longest TFD on touchscreen, followed by older adults 
and younger adults. Finally, there were no significant differences existed on the 
TTF,  F(2,  31)  =  .544, p =  .586  and  ADF,  F(2,  31)  =  .950, p =  .398  of  video 
screens, nor on the TTF F(2, 31) = 1.707, p = .198 and ADF F(2, 31) = .516, p = 
.602 of touchscreen.  

5 Discussion  

This study zoomed in on the physical context of a museum as a key element of 
the  museum  visitors’  learning  experience  (Falk  and  Dierking,  2004).  The 
analysis  first  examined  various  museum  elements,  and  compared  visitor’s 
engagement with  room’s information boards, exhibition’s information boards 

 

exhibits case’ information boards, exhibits, video screens and touchscreens. The 
analysis of several AOIs and exhibition’s elements revealed that most visitors 
first notice and look at the exhibition’s information boards. It is interesting that 
touchscreens had the shortest TFF (time to first fixation) and having the highest 
average  TFF  (total  fixation  time),  which  highlights  the  great  visual  attention 
attraction  power  of  such  digital  elements  within  a  museum  exhibition.  This 
suggests a critical difference in exhibition’s elements being noticed and lure the 
attention of visitors when entering an exhibition space. 

The analysis of the exhibition elements TFD (total fixation duration) revealed 
that visitors spent most time engaging with video screens, followed by exhibits, 
and touchscreens, while information boards of different exhibits seem to have 
attracted  least  attention.  These  findings  confirm  the  central  importance  of 
integrating  digital  media  in  exhibition  spaces.  This  is  in  line  with  previous 
studies arguing  that digital materials can lead to higher interest and attention 
levels (Venkatraman, Dimoka, Vo, & Pavlou, 2018). While digital media per se 
may not be the motivating factors for people to visit a museum, they are indeed 
the elements that receive most attention during a visit (Falk & Dierking, 2013).  

A  deeper  comparison  of  the  AFD  (average  fixation  duration)  of  exhibition’s 
elements revealed that touchscreens and textual description (e.g. exhibits case’ 
information boards) had the same AFD. This might imply that touchscreens do 
not attract additional attention but are rather perceived as a mere substitute to 
traditional media and reading materials offered. The correlation analysis of eye 
tracking measures further revealed insights into the relations of fixation times 
and exhibition’s elements. The findings show that a strong positive correlation 
exists between exhibits and exhibits case’ information boards, sharing a high 
TFF and TFD. This means that when a visitor’s engages attention on the exhibit, 
so  they  do  on  the  information  board  close  by.  Moreover,  the  relationship 
between exhibits and touchscreens has been analysed, and a positive correlation 
of  the  TFF  has  been  found.  It  can  therefore  be  concluded  that  visitors  who 
viewed  the  exhibits  first,  are  also  likely  to  engage  with  the  exhibits  case’ 
information boards and touchscreens, and also likely longer with the exhibits 
case’ information boards (TFD). In addition, visitors who saw the exhibits case’ 
information  boards,  are  also  more  likely  to  also  notice  the  touchscreens  and 
engage with it. 

the  findings  have  revealed  several 

Furthermore, 
interesting  negative 
correlations between physical exhibition’s elements (see Figure 1). There is a 
negative correlation between the time spent on exhibition’s information boards 

 

to the first-time view on room’s information boards. This implies that visitors 
who engage right away at the entrance with the general room information board, 
may think they have sufficient information, which causes them to engage less 
time with the exhibition’s information boards. Moreover, those participants who 
spend a longer average fixation time on exhibition’s information boards, seem 
to spend less total time engaging with video screens. This suggests that the more 
time visitors spend on average engaging with a physical information medium, 
the less likely they are to spend time watching a video. Finally, the study could 
reveal that visitors, who notice the exhibition’s information board first, spent 
less  time  engaging  with  touchscreens.  Overall,  these  insights  show  the 
importance of TFF, the time to first fixation, as an indicator of what medium is 
used  subsequently  for  knowledge  acquisition  and  learning  (e.g.  information 
board vs. video screens vs. touchscreen). From the total fixation duration, a key 
learning is that visitors are highly subjective in their behaviours, and show a 
preference of a type of medium throughout their visit, e.g. visitors spending time 
on exhibition’s information boards, spend less time engaging with digital media, 
i.e. videos. 

Finally, the study was interested in understanding museum visitor behaviours 
by age group.  When it comes to the visitors’ time spent on general information 
boards,  the  analysis  could  demonstrate  statistically  significant  differences 
between the three compared age groups. It was found that the average fixation 
duration on exhibition’s information boards was highest within the group older 
adults, followed by adults, and younger adults. This suggests that information 
boards are particularly valuable to older age groups, while younger visitors may 
spend  less  time  interacting  with  this  particular  medium,  or  may  have  a 
preference for information acquisition through other displayed media relating to 
an  artefact  (e.g.  touchscreens,  video  screens).  In  fact,  the  analysis  of  digital 
media, namely video screens and touchscreens, found a significant difference 
between the age groups. Adults had the longest total fixation duration on both 
video screens and touchscreens, followed by older adults, and younger adults. 
This  may  suggest  that  adults  and  older  adults  generally  spend  longer  time 
engaging with objects, compared to younger people. Overall, the comparison of 
visitors’  age  groups  revealed  that  for  many  forms  of  exhibition  elements 
engagement,  no  significant  differences  could  be  found,  suggesting  similar 
behaviours. At the same time, a few interesting nuances relating to TFD could 
be found, which suggests a difference in attention spans between age groups. 
This finally highlights the importance of carefully design exhibitions by keeping 
in mind in what form, where and for how long information is presented. 

 

6 Conclusion  

Physical contexts, space design and exhibition’s elements play an important role 
in museum learning experiences (Falk & Dierking, 2013). As the landscape of 
museum  experiences  is  diversifying  through  the  integration  of  digital 
technologies,  it  is  of  particular  interest  to design  artefacts  in  a  way  that  they 
blend  physical  and  digital  media  for  an  optimal  visitor  flow  and  learning 
experience (Venkatraman et al., 2018; Rainoldi et al., 2018). This study used a 
mobile eye tracking research design with 34 participants to capture the visitors’ 
experience in a real-life museum context. The findings suggest that the museum 
experience is a complex construct happening at the intersection of the visitor’s 
personal context (e.g. age) and the physical design put into place by the museum 
(Falk & Dierking, 2013). The data analysis of the visitors’ eye fixations, from 
time to first fixation, average fixation and total fixation duration, revealed which 
exhibition’s  elements  particularly  capture  visitor  attention  and  lead  them  to 
engage and spend time. A comparison of three age groups highlighted varying 
overall fixation times, e.g. with older people spending more time on information 
boards  than  younger  people.  Fixation  time  is  a  primary  indicator  for  visual 
attention and cognitive processes, and thus  a marker  of learning taking place 
(Rainoldi et al., 2018). Therefore, a nuanced understanding of how much time 
visitors  generally,  and  at  different  ages,  spend  on  observing  exhibition’s 
elements,  offers  valuable  insights  into  designing  effective  museum  learning 
experiences.  

6.1 Theoretical and practical implications 

By conducting a mobile eye tracking research, this study adds to the scarce body 
of literature using mobile eye trackers in real-life situations (Krogh-Jespersen et 
al., 2020; Mokatren et al., 2016; Rainoldi et al., 2018; Scott et al., 2019). Mobile 
eye tracking was critical to gather insights into real life visitor behaviour and 
gaze  movement  (Filippini-Fantoni,  et  al.  2013)  that  could  not  have  been 
revealed  otherwise.  This  study  builds  on  recent  studies,  e.g.  Rainoldi  et  al. 
(2018), in that it analysed museums as experiential environments of interest to 
study visitor behaviour. 

This study expanded our understanding of the relationship between exhibition’s 
elements and visitor interaction, and put the analysis of the physical elements 
found in a museum design at the centre stage. One of the core tasks of museums 
is to design experiences in a way that they are engaging, invite visitors to interact 
with the artefacts, and foster learning (Falk & Dierking, 2013; Rainoldi et al., 

 

2018).  For  the  practice  of  museum  design,  our  study  shows  not  only  which 
exhibition’s elements visitors interact with or not, but also highlight that there 
exists a relationship among exhibition elements, and the way (order, sequence, 
duration)  visitors  engage  with  them  (e.g.  exhibits,  information  boards  and 
videos). The closer analysis of physical vs. digital media elements brought to 
light  the  insight  that  digital  media  could  attract  the  highest  attention  and 
engagement levels. 

On a more general level, the study emphasizes for experience design that there 
is no such thing as one experience for all. Instead, museum experience designers 
need to design with their target audience in mind. This means in a first step 1) 
getting  to  know  the  visitor  target  group  and  age  structure,  and  2)  design  the 
experience of exhibition rooms, visitor flows and information presentation with 
different  age  groups  in  mind  that  maximizes  the  possibility  of  individual 
experiences that visitors can have. For example, one visitor type may want to 
get  a  fast  general  overview  at  the  room  entrance,  and  then  quickly  look  at 
exhibits to get a feeling of the room, while a second visitor type may only want 
to learn about exhibits through digital media, and a third visitor type may want 
to spend extensive time on each exhibit and the surrounding descriptions and 
information boards. 

6.2 Directions for future research 

Mobile eye tracking research in tourism research is a method that has just started 
to gain traction. In line with recent studies (Krogh-Jespersen et al., 2020; Scott 
et  al.,  2019),  we  recommend  further  application  of  mobile  eye  tracking  as  a 
method  that  is  particularly  suited  to  understand  real-time  visitor  behaviours 
without  intrusion  in  natural  environments.  Market  research  could  use  mobile 
eye  tracking  to  offer  answers  to  specific  problem  situations,  e.g.  design  or 
redesign of retail stores, visitor attractions, public spaces of interest, where the 
goal is to a) design new experience concepts, or b) enhance existing experiences, 
flows  and  customer  journeys.  Moreover,  for  scholars  in  the  research  field  of 
tourism  experiences,  mobile  eye  tracking  could  be  a  particularly  beneficial 
method to uncover cognitive and behavioural insights that often remain hidden 
in traditionally used methods that ask for articulation of the lived experience in 
retrospect. 

 

 

Acknowledgements 

like 

the  financial  support  from 
The  authors  would 
Bundeskanzleramt Sektion II: Kunst und Kultur and Land Salzburg, Abteilung 
2: 
Gesellschaft/Referat-Wissenschaft, 
Erwachsenenbildung, Bildungsförderung. 

to  acknowledge 

Bildung 

Kultur, 

und 

References 

Anderson, D., & Lucas, K. B. (1997). The effectiveness of orienting students to 
the physical features of a science museum prior to visitation. Research 
in Science Education, 27(4), 485-495. 

Antón,  C.,  Camarero,  C.,  &  Garrido,  M.  J.  (2018).  A  journey  through  the 
museum: Visit factors that prevent or further visitor satiation. Annals of 
Tourism Research, 73, 48-61. 

Bartneck, C., Masuoka, A., Takahashi, T., & Fukaya, T. (2006). The learning 
experience  with  electronic  museum  guides. Psychology  of Aesthetics, 
Creativity, and the Arts, (1), 18-25. 

Bartneck, C., Masuoka, A., Takahashi, T., & Fukaya, T. (2007). An electronic 
museum guide in real use. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the 
Arts, 1(2), 114-120. 

Beck, J., Rainoldi, M., & Egger, R. (2019). Virtual reality in tourism: a state-of-

the-art review. Tourism Review, 74(3), 586-612. 

Bitgood, S. (2006). An analysis of visitor circulation: Movement patterns and 
the general value principle. Curator: The Museum Journal, 49(4), 463-
475. 

Bojko, A. (2013). Eye tracking the user experience. New York: Rosenfeld Media. 

Buquet, C., Charlier, J. R., & Paris, V. (1988). Museum application of an eye 
tracker. Medical  and  Biological  Engineering  and  Computing, 26(3), 
277-281. 

Davey, G. (2005). What is museum fatigue. Visitor Studies Today, 8(3), 17-21. 

Douglas, A., Lubbe, B., & Van Rooyen, A. (2018). Business travellers’ use of 
mobile  travel  applications:  a  generational  analysis.  Information 
Technology & Tourism, 18(1-4), 113-132. 

 

Duchowski, A. (2007). Eye tracking methodology: Theory and practice. London: 

Springer. 

Dunlop, L., Clarke, L., & McKelvey-Martin, V. (2019). Free-choice learning in 
school science: a model for collaboration between formal and informal 
science  educators. International  Journal  of  Science  Education,  Part 
B, 9(1), 13-28. 

Eghbal-Azar, K. & Widlok, T. (2012). Potentials and limitations of mobile eye 
tracking in visitor studies: Evidence from field research at two museum 
exhibitions in Germany. Social Science Computer Review, 1-16. 

Ellis, G. D., & Rossman, J. R. (2008). Creating Value for Participants through 
Experience Staging: Parks, Recreation, and Tourism in the Experience 
Industry. Journal of Park & Recreation Administration, 26(4), 1-20. 

Falk,  J.  H.  &  Dierking,  L.  D.  (2013).  Museum  experience  revisited.  Walnut 

Creek: Left Coast Press. 

Falk,  J.  H.,  &  Dierking,  L.  D.  (2004).  The  contextual  model  of 
learning. Reinventing  the  museum:  Historical  and  contemporary  perspectives 
on the paradigm shift, 139-142. 

Falk, J., & Storksdieck, M. (2005). Using the contextual model of learning to 
understand  visitor 
learning  from  a  science  center  exhibition. Science 
education, 89(5), 744-778. 

Filippini-Fantoni,  S.,  Jaebker,  K.,  Bauer,  D.  &  Stofer,  K.  (2013).  Capturing 
visitors’  gazes.  three  eye  tracking  studies  in  museums.  The  annual 
conference of museums and the web, April 17-20, 2013, Portland, USA.  
Germak,  C.,  &  Khan,  S.  (2017).  Interaction  design  applications  for  museum 
spaces. New exhibit paths driven by a Bluetooth sensor’s system. The 
Design Journal, 20(sup1), S3914-S3924. 

Goulding,  C. 

(2000).  The  museum  environment  and 

the  visitor 

experience. European Journal of marketing, 34(3/4), 251-278. 

Hein, G.E. (1998). Learning in the Museum. London: Routledge 
Henderson, M., Selwyn, N., & Aston, R. (2017). What works and why? Student 
perceptions  of  ‘useful’digital  technology  in  university  teaching  and 
learning. Studies in Higher Education, 42(8), 1567-1579. 

Holdgaard,  N.  (2012).  Museum  Facebook  users…  Who  are  they?.  The 

Transformative Museum: Proceedings, 150-164. 

 

Hsu,  T.  Y.,  &  Liang,  H.  Y.  (2017).  A  cyclical  learning  model  to  promote 
children’s online and on-site museum learning. The Electronic Library, 
35(2), 333-347. 

Hsu, T. Y., Liang, H., Chiou, C. K., & Tseng, J. C. (2018). CoboChild: a blended 
in  museum 

mobile  game-based 
contexts. Data Technologies and Applications, 52(3), 294-312. 

learning  service  for  children 

Huddleston, P., Behe, B. K., Minahan, S., & Fernandez, R. T. (2015). Seeking 
attention:  an  eye 
in-store  merchandise 
displays. International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, 
43(6), 561‐574. 

study  of 

tracking 

Kang,  J.  H.,  Jang,  J.  C.,  &  Jeong,  C.  (2018).  Understanding  museum  visitor 
satisfaction  and  revisit  intentions  through  mobile  guide  system: 
moderating role of age in museum mobile guide adoption. Asia Pacific 
Journal of Tourism Research, 23(2), 95-108. 

Kastner, S., & Pinsk, M. A. (2004). Visual attention as a multilevel selection 
process.  Cognitive,  Affective,  &  Behavioral  Neuroscience,  4(4),  483-
500. 

Kiefer, P., Giannopoulos, I., & Raubal, M. (2014). Where am I? Investigating 
map matching during self‐localization with mobile eye tracking in an 
urban environment. Transactions in GIS, 18(5), 660-686. 

Knight, B. A., Horsley, M. & Eliot, M. (2014). Eye tracking and the learning 
system: An overview. In Horsley, M., Eliot, M., Knight, B. A., & Reilly, 
R.  (Eds.)  Current  trends  in  eye  tracking  research  (pp.  281-285.). 
Springer, New York.  

Kounaves, S., Archer, L., King, H., & Pegram, E. (2016). Science learning and 
engagement  in  the  digital  age:  understanding  the  effect  of  mobile 
technology  on  adult  engagement  experiences  at  a  natural  history 
museum. Mobile  Learning  Futures–Sustaining  Quality  Research  and 
Practice in Mobile Learning, 361-366. 

Krogh-Jespersen, S., Quinn, K. A., Krenzer, W. L. D., Nguyen, C. T., Greenslit, 
J., & Price, A. (2020). Exploring the Awe-some: Mobile eye-tracking 
museum. 
in 
insights 
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/2u3cb 

science 

awe 

into 

a 

Lin, H. C., Swarna, H., & Bruning, P. F. (2017). Taking a global view on brand 
post  popularity:  Six  social  media  brand  post  practices  for  global 
markets. Business Horizons, 60(5), 621-633. 

 

Lundgren, L., & Crippen, K. J. (2019). Learning and the practice of social media 
in  informal  science  education  centers. International  Journal  on  E-
Learning, 18(1), 31-52. 

Mayr, E., Knipfer, K., & Wessel, D. (2009). In-sights into mobile learning: An 
exploration  of  mobile  eye  tracking  methodology  for  learning  in 
museums. Researching  mobile  learning:  Frameworks,  methods,  and 
research designs, 189-204. 

McGuinness,  C.,  &  Fulton,  C.  (2019).  Digital  literacy  in  higher  education:  a 
case  study  of  student  engagement  with  e-tutorials  using  blended 
learning. Journal of Information Technology Education: Innovations in 
Practice, 18, 001-028. 

Mokatren,  M.,  Kuflik,  T.,  &  Shimshoni,  I.  (2016).  Exploring  the  Potential 
Contribution  of  Mobile  Eye-tracking  Technology  in  Enhancing  the 
Museum Visit Experience. In AVI* CH (pp. 23-31). 

Mokatren, M., Kuflik, T., & Shimshoni, I. (2018). Exploring the potential of a 
mobile eye tracker as an intuitive indoor pointing device: A case study 
in  cultural  heritage. Future  Generation  Computer  Systems, 81,  528-
541. 

Neuhofer,  B.,  Buhalis,  D.,  &  Ladkin,  A.  (2014).  A  typology  of  technology-
enhanced  tourism  experiences.  International  Journal  of  Tourism 
Research, 16(4), 340–350.  

Ooi,  C.  S.  (2003,  October).  Crafting  tourism  experiences:  Managing  the 
attention  product.  In 12th  Nordic  Symposium  on  Tourism  and 
Hospitality Research. Stavanger University College, Stavanger. 
Pachman, M., Arguel, A., Lockyer, L., Kennedy, G., & Lodge, J. (2016). Eye 
tracking  and  early  detection  of  confusion 
learning 
environments:  Proof  of  concept. Australasian  Journal  of  Educational 
Technology, 32(6). 

in  digital 

Pallud,  J.  (2017).  Impact  of  interactive  technologies  on  stimulating  learning 
experiences in a museum. Information & Management, 54(4), 465-478. 
Rainoldi, M., Neuhofer, B., & Jooss, M. (2018). Mobile Eyetracking of Museum 
and  Communication 

Learning  Experiences. 
Technologies in Tourism 2018 (pp. 473-485). Springer, Cham. 
Schwan,  S.,  Gussmann,  M.,  Gerjets,  P.,  Drecoll,  A.,  &  Feiber,  A.  (2020). 
Distribution of attention in a gallery segment on the National Socialists’ 
Führer  cult:  diving  deeper 
into  visitors’  cognitive  exhibition 
experiences  using  mobile  eye  tracking. Museum  Management  and 
Curatorship, 35(1), 71-88. 

Information 

In 

 

Scott,  N.,  Zhang,  R.,  Le,  D.,  &  Moyle,  B.  (2019).  A  review  of  eye-tracking 

research in tourism. Current Issues in Tourism, 22(10), 1244-1261. 

Strohmaier,  R.,  Sprung,  G.,  Nischelwitzer,  A.,  &  Schadenbauer,  S.  (2015). 
Using  visitor-flow  visualization  to  improve  visitor  experience  in 
museums and exhibitions. Museums and the Web (MW2015). 
Trofanenko, B. M. (2010). The educational promise of public history museum 

exhibits. Theory & Research in Social Education, 38(2), 270-288. 

Tsiropoulou,  E.  E.,  Thanou,  A.,  &  Papavassiliou,  S.  (2017).  Quality  of 
loop 

Experience-based  museum 
approach. Social Network Analysis and Mining, 7(1), 33. 

touring:  A  human 

the 

in 

Venkatraman,  V.,  Dimoka,  A.,  Vo,  K.,  &  Pavlou,  P.  A.  (2018).  Relative 
Effectiveness  of  Print  and  Digital  Advertising:  A  Memory 
Perspective. Fox  School  of  Business  Research  Paper,  (18-037). 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3254528 

Wagler,  A.,  &  Hanus,  M.  D.  (2018).  Comparing  Virtual  Reality  Tourism  to 
Real-Life Experience: Effects of Presence and Engagement on Attitude 
and Enjoyment. Communication Research Reports, 35(5), 456-464. 

Yoshimura, Y., Sinatra, R., Krebs, A., & Ratti, C. (2019). Analysis of visitors’ 
mobility patterns through random walk in the Louvre Museum. Journal 
of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 1-16. 

Yoshimura, Y., Sobolevsky, S., Ratti, C., Girardin, F., Carrascal, J. P., Blat, J., 
&  Sinatra,  R.  (2014).  An analysis  of  visitors'  behavior  in  the  Louvre 
Museum: A study using Bluetooth data. Environment and Planning B: 
Planning and Design, 41(6), 1113-1131. 

Zanibellato,  F.,  Rosin,  U.,  &  Casarin,  F.  (2018).  How  the  Attributes  of  a 
Museum Experience Influence Electronic Word-of-Mouth Valence: An 
Analysis  of  Online  Museum  Reviews. International  Journal  of  Arts 
Management, 21(1), 76-90. 

Zwart, D. P., Van Luit, J. E., Noroozi, O., & Goei, S. L. (2017). The effects of 
digital  learning  material  on  students’  mathematics  learning  in 
vocational education. Cogent Education, 4(1), 1313581. 

 

 

View publication stats
View publication stats

