Museum Management and Curatorship

ISSN: 0964-7775 (Print) 1872-9185 (Online) Journal homepage: 
https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rmmc20

The Evaluation of Museum Multimedia
Applications: Lessons from Research

Maria Economou

To cite this article: Maria Economou (1998) The Evaluation of Museum Multimedia 
Applications:
Lessons from Research, Museum Management and Curatorship, 17:2, 173-187, DOI:
10.1080/09647779800501702

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/09647779800501702

Published online: 11 May 2007.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 630

View related articles

Citing articles: 8 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rmmc20


Pergamon

Museum Management and Curatorship, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp. 173–187, 1998

© 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved

Printed in Great Britain
0260–4779/99/$ - see front matter

PII:S0260–4779(98)00043-0

The Evaluation of Museum Multimedia
Applications: Lessons from Research

Maria Economou

Introduction

In museums and exhibitions, the use of interactive multimedia applications con-
tinues to spread, and now that the technological problems of the early experi-
mental years have largely been solved, curators and educators are focusing more
on the audience’s needs and the quality of the interactive experience (Bearman,
1995). Although the museum community is becoming increasingly aware of the
need to evaluate multimedia displays (McNamara, 1986; Raphling, 1994; Dierk-
ing and Falk, 1998), it is surprising and disappointing that to date very few
systematic, in-depth evaluation studies are publicly available. This paper first
describes briefly the results obtained from a research study which examined the
effectiveness of a multimedia application created for exhibition interpretation;
and then, it examines the lessons to be learned from this project and refers to
their wider implications for those involved in the design and evaluation of
museum multimedia. The study was part of doctoral research carried out at
the University of Oxford, funded by a scholarship from the Lambrakis Research
Foundation, Athens. It focused on the design and evaluation of a prototype gal-
lery interactive developed for the presentation of an important archaeological
site, the classical Greek colony of Euesperides in North Africa. This was a 
compo-
nent of the temporary exhibition on the archaeology of Euesperides which was
organized by the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, and shown at the Museum of
Oxford in autumn 1995. The Euesperides program combined the fragmented
information derived from the excavation of the site—near modern Benghazi in
Libya (Vickers et al., 1994)—with the historical background of the city
(Economou, 1993), and set out to interpret the objects on display.

The project followed all the standard stages of a multimedia production for
a museum exhibition: (a) Research on the content of the application; (b) Collec-
tion of the material; (c) Multimedia design and programming (Economou, 1995);

(d) Formative evaluation; (e) Integration in a museum exhibition; (f) Summative
evaluation of the program’s effectiveness (Economou, 1996, 1997); (g) Study of
the long-term effect on visitors; and (h) Impact on museum staff. More specifi-
cally, the areas investigated were:

1. the potential of multimedia for presenting the results from an excavation and
thus improving the public understanding of archaeology;

2. the way formative evaluation assisted and influenced the design of the appli-
cation;


3. who used the program in the exhibition (and who did not);

4. the way those visitors used the multimedia application;

5. the learning outcomes and emotional impact of the program (immediate and
long-term); and

6. the effect of the presence of the computer program on the way visitors
explored the exhibition.

Methodology

Throughout its design, the Euesperides prototype was tested with a variety of
users including schoolchildren, adults, the Education Guides of the Ashmolean
Museum, graduate students, and curators. Formative evaluation followed two
main approaches: (i) informal sessions observing the users’ interaction with the
prototype and recording their reactions and comments while they were encour-
aged to ‘think aloud’; and (ii) more structured evaluation, where the users were
asked to fill in a questionnaire after using the program. Summative evaluation
constituted the main focus of the study and employed six different methods:
observation (sample 117) and interviews with users (sample 75) and non-users
(sample 59) of the multimedia program, computer interaction logging (361 valid
logs of total of 446), self-administered questionnaires (qualitative 
information,
self-selected sample), analysis of comments in the visitors book (qualitative 
infor-
mation, self-selected sample), mail survey with computer users five to six
months after their visit to the exhibition (38 letters received), and interviews
with museum staff. The combination of a variety of methods allowed the com-
parison of findings and the examination of different aspects of the museum
interactive experience (Economou, 1997).

Findings

Overall, the results obtained from the evaluation of the Euesperides prototype
were positive about the use of the program both as an independent interpret-
ative device and as a component of the exhibition. However, any generalization
must be treated with caution. Like all cultural multimedia products, the 
Euesper-
ides program was created and used within a unique environment and the results
of the study must be considered in this context. Nevertheless, some of the find-
ings have broader applicability and the valuable lessons learned from the Eues-
perides study would benefit any museum professional considering the use of
multimedia technology for public presentation.

Formative Evaluation

The experience from the Euesperides project demonstrated the valuable role of
formative evaluation and confirmed the importance of testing with the users.
Even when informal and with a small sample, formative evaluation offered useful
feedback about the program’s content, language, navigation, and the intuit-
iveness of the interface, before too much effort and resources had been
expended. User input throughout the design process led to several changes (for
example, in the basic structure of the prototype, the titling of certain 
features,


and the addition of sound buttons for the pronunciation of difficult words). It
also helped to define the profile and needs of different user groups.

The Computer Program as an Interpretative Device

The computer program functioned successfully as a presentation and interpret-
ation medium. It offered background information about the largely unknown
ancient city of Euesperides, contextualized the artefacts on display, and
explained their importance today. One of the most attractive features of the
program was its interactive character. Several users commented on the fact that
they could choose what they wanted to see, explore different paths, and control
navigation. This was an interesting finding, particularly since in this experi-
mental and low-cost prototype the level of interactivity was actually rather 
lim-
ited. In the event, the computer program turned out to be one of the most
popular exhibits in the gallery, receiving the highest number of visitors (40 
per
cent of the 117 tracked visitors) and the highest number of repeat visits of all
exhibits (eight of 32 repeat visits). Additionally, visitors spent more time 
with
the computer program (3.75 minutes mean) than with any other exhibit (1.3
minutes with exhibit in the second ranking). The novelty of the technology
appears to have played an important part in this, attracting visitors with no 
prior
knowledge of or interest in the subject. It is likely that this element will 
become
less important in attracting visitors to specific museum displays as the use of
computers continues to penetrate all aspects of our lives (Department of Trade
and Industry, 1997). The success of the computer program might also be related
to the fact that some of the other exhibits were supported by limited or 
unattrac-
tive explanatory material, whereas the objects certainly required some expla-
nation if their meaning was to be understood and the exhibition layout may
have been confusing to some.

Several months after their visit, most respondents to the mail survey were
able to recall many details of their experience. Visitors remembered not only
what they had done and felt during their visit, but could also describe what the
exhibition and the program had been about, what they had contained, and the
thoughts that these had triggered. Their answers suggest that the visit to the
exhibition, and particularly the interaction with the computer program, was
memorable and had had a lasting impact. Nevertheless, it was interesting to
observe that almost 20 per cent of users interviewed could not describe cor-
rectly what the program was about even after three minutes’ interaction. In
order to understand the subject and main ideas of the program, users apparently
needed to invest more than a few minutes. This was particularly true for casual
visitors who had come upon the exhibition unprepared and without any parti-
cular interest in the subject matter. The results might be related to the com-
plexity and design of the program. It is also possible that for a portion of the
audience, the process of using a touchscreen computer was the prime attraction
during the initial period of interaction, while attention to the subject matter 
and
understanding of it began to be established only after a few minutes’ use.

All these findings indicate that in the setting of an exhibition the multimedia
program is a very powerful medium with considerable potential for communi-
cating ideas. But they also raise issues about its relationship with the other, 
more
traditional media used in the exhibition, and in particular with the real 
artefacts.


How did the virtual affect the real, especially in this situation, where they 
were
placed in the same room? This important issue is discussed below.

The Computer Program as a Component of the Exhibition

In direct contrast to the fears of many museum professionals, the results of
the Euesperides study indicated that the computer’s presence in the exhibition
generally enhanced the visitors’ experience. For a large section of users the
computer interactive contributed considerably to their enjoyment (73 per cent
of 75 users interviewed) and understanding of the display (57 to 62 per cent
of users interviewed). Similar comments were mentioned in the post-exhibition
mail survey. A female visitor in her forties, for example, wrote:

The program provided a useful tool which enabled not only myself, but also my
six-year-old son, to gain much more from the exhibition than would otherwise 
have
been the case.… We…felt that being able to use the computer greatly increased
our enjoyment and understanding.

Several users mentioned in the interviews that the program made things
clearer, put them into perspective, and motivated them to go back and look at
the objects again, though over a quarter of the tracked visitors were simply
using the exhibition space as a corridor on their way out and a slightly smaller
group (19 per cent) would have probably used the exhibition in the same way,
but stopped instead to sample the interactive program. As a couple of visitors
mentioned specifically in their letters, the computer program was what had
attracted them to the display and without which they would probably not have
stopped to look at the exhibition at all. Almost half of this group then stayed
longer to look at the objects on display, but only after using the program.

Visitors invested substantial amounts of time interacting with the computer,
more than with any other individual exhibit, though it was interesting to 
observe
that the time visitors spent at the computer, did not affect adversely the time
they spent in the rest of the gallery. Computer users spent over seven minutes
longer in the gallery than non-users. Even when the time at the computer is
deducted, the remaining time they spent in the gallery (4.8 minutes mean, 2.1
minutes median time) is still considerably higher than the time spent by non-
users (Table 1). This confirms that the computer program encouraged visitors
to explore and engage with the rest of the exhibits. Furthermore, interaction
with the computer program helped several users learn about specific themes
related to the exhibition. That learning was related to the acquisition of 
factual
information, but it also involved the consolidation of previous knowledge, the
raising of questions, and the development of an awareness of the way in which

Table 1. Comparison of time spent in the gallery between computer users and 
non-users
(sample: 117)

Mean time with computer   Mean time—rest of

exhibition

1. Computer Users           3.7 minutes          4.8 minutes

2. Non-users                 –             1.5 minutes


archaeologists work and the types of evidence they exploit to extract infor-
mation about the past.

At the same time, the program sometimes also overshadowed, at least tempor-
arily, the rest of the displays. Several visitors were absorbed in the 
Euesperides
prototype while using it, but some of them would explore the exhibition after-
wards. Few visitors (eight of 117 observed), however, returned to the computer
kiosk after looking at the objects. This indicates that the program was not suc-
cessful in making direct links with the specific objects on display. One reason
for this can be attributed to the late preparation of the exhibition’s layout 
and
choice of specific objects to be displayed, which in turn did not allow for the
design of more explicit links between the information presented on-screen and
the exhibition cases. But even without this practical limitation, the absorbing
power of the computer screen made difficult the successful integration of the
interactive program with the surrounding static displays.

Who Used the Program?

The specific profile of users and non-users of the Euesperides program might
be related to a number of factors, such as the type of exhibition, the specific
museum, or its admission policy. What is of general interest is that the 
computer
program appealed to all age and gender combinations. Female and male visitors
were equally likely to use it, even when the ratio of male/female visitors is 
taken
into account. This is in contrast to the findings of most museum multimedia
evaluations. With the exception of two other studies (Hilke et al., 1988; 
Allison
and Gwaltney, 1991), most evaluations of computer interactives in museum set-
tings showed a predominance of male users (Sharpe, 1983; Doering et al., 1989;
Menninger, 1991; McManus, 1993; Giusti, 1994a, b). Furthermore, female users
of  the Euesperides program tended to spend longer with the program. Children
under age 11 represent the largest age group of computer users, almost a quarter
of the total number of users (394 valid interaction logs). This confirms the 
com-
monly held belief that these programs are popular with a young audience. How-
ever, the program was also used by visitors over 55 years old (19 per cent).
Unlike most similar studies (Sharpe, 1983; Doering et al., 1989; Allison and
Gwaltney, 1991; Giusti, 1994a), more than half of computer users were over 25
(Figure 1).

Both of the results relating to the gender and the age of computer users are
not surprising, if we consider the penetration of information technology into
all sections of society. It is useful to take into account the results of a 
study of
5000 households and 1300 businesses in the United Kingdom, the United States
of America, Japan, Germany, and France commissioned by the United Kingdom
Department of Trade and Industry in 1997. This showed that “across all the
benchmark countries ownership and usage of information and communication
technologies is growing” (Department of Trade and Industry, 1997, p. 127).
Currently the consumer penetration of hardware and infrastructure (39 per cent)
is substantially lower than that of business (94 per cent) (Department of Trade
and Industry, 1997, p. 17). The expansion of information technology in the
business sector is, however, likely to have a growing impact on the general
population. From those who use computers outside the home, 33 per cent of
their time at either work, school, or college is taken up in front of a 
computer


1. Family group using the computer program in the exhibition.

screen. Considering these general changes in society, we can anticipate that
museum visitors will be increasingly familiar with computers. Interestingly, 
how-
ever, the Euesperides program was also used by a considerable number of visi-
tors with very little (7 per cent) or no previous experience (16 per cent) of
their use, whereas a very small number of visitors who did not use the program
were opposed to the use of computers in museums in general, not finding them
useful and preferring the ‘real thing’.

How Was the Program Used?

While most users found this program easy to use, there were, in general, several
indications that its usability could have been improved. Because the program
presented a large amount of information, including a complex set of links, it
did not always succeed in maintaining ease of use. Furthermore, the introduction
of an evaluation screen after only a few minutes’ use of the application 
appeared
to disrupt communication. This was programmed to appear after three minutes’
use of the program and asked about ease of use and satisfaction with the level
of information provided. It also asked users to select one or more adjectives 
from
a list provided describing the program. Although the answers which visitors gave
to the on-screen questions offered useful feedback, the way this evaluation
screen was introduced in the Euesperides prototype disoriented and confused
many users.

Visitors’ gender, age, and group composition were also reflected in their
behaviour and interaction with the computer at the exhibition on Euesperides.
Almost 60 per cent of 117 tracked visitors used the computer in groups of two
or more, which was in accordance with the findings of other studies (Doering
et al., 1989; Menninger, 1991; McManus, 1993; Giusti, 1994b). Most users cre-
ated unique paths through the application, taking advantage of the options
offered, but some general trends emerged. The analysis of the interaction logs
indicated that the most popular type of navigation of all age groups was linear
(36 per cent of the 391 valid logs). It appears that older visitors in 
particular


were more likely to explore the program in a linear fashion. Younger visitors
(under 18) on the other hand, showed a greater tendency to navigate randomly
and explore several areas superficially. It cannot be excluded that more exten-
sive general use of programs and systems designed in a hypertext way, such as
those available on the World Wide Web, might gradually encourage non-linear
ways of thinking and exploring.

Recommendations for Similar Projects

These findings, as well as the general experience gained from the study, can be
interpreted in a wider museum context. The implications of the results and the
lessons learned are presented below in the form of guidelines for enthusiasts,
professionals, and institutions working in the area of cultural multimedia.

Guidelines for User Interface Design

User interface design is an important part of multimedia production; a badly
designed interface will make the program difficult to use and can negate 
impress-
ive and rich content.

I Formative testing of the interface is vital and should be undertaken at 
several
stages during the design of the program. This can be carried out informally
with a small number of visitors or potential users.

I The application should be programmed so that it forgives users’ mistakes and

offers feedback about the various operations. For example, users should be
warned about images which will take a long time to appear on-screen.

I Public information systems addressing a wide audience of mixed abilities and

computer experience should be kept very simple. This is often difficult to
reconcile with depth and complexity of content.

I Interactive programs should include some form of concept map or index,

providing an indication of how much material has been included and the best
way to access it quickly. This is important, because, as compared to traditional
media, multimedia programs do not offer a clear indication of what is there
to explore.

I When providing additional information for the more interested users, it is

more effective to offer it in layers, keeping the interface simple and 
intuitive.
Broad-ranging and information-rich applications require even more attention
to evaluation, the structuring and layering of information, and the provision
of concept maps, indexes, clear navigation and searching tools. These would
prevent new users becoming intimidated by cluttered screens and, at the
same time, they allow more interested visitors to navigate easily in greater
depth.

I Important messages and content information need to be repeated in different

ways throughout the interactive program and not be concentrated into the
first few screens alone because visitors are likely to spend the first few
minutes exploring the interface of the application and not pay particular atten-
tion to the subject content. For this reason, the main interactive features,
buttons, and special effects will work more effectively when presented in
the beginning, so that users can experience them and become familiar with
their functions.


I If the function of navigation buttons is not immediately clear, there should
be a part of the program set aside for users to test and learn what all the
buttons do. The names for buttons should be chosen carefully so as to offer
a clear indication of their function, especially for the benefit of users not
familiar with computer terminology. Adding titles to button icons will assist
communication.

I Metaphors from the real world can be used very effectively to communicate

messages (e.g. the metaphor of a library or a book shelf for organizing literary
sources or bibliography, and the floorplan of a gallery or museum for con-
necting and grouping images of different objects). Badly chosen or ill-
implemented metaphors, however, can have the opposite effect. The use of
metaphors must be considered carefully and tested with the users, whereas
designers should also remain aware that some metaphors might have a short
life-span.

I Quizzes and games can be incorporated in the application, since they are

attractive to both young and old visitors. These can be used to make links to
information presented in the program and repeat in a playful way messages
presented previously.

I The use of sound must be thought out very carefully in a public gallery,

because it can be disruptive. Used sparingly, however, it can reinforce actions
and offer useful feedback to users, e.g. to indicate when an operation has
been successfully completed. In some cases, it can also offer information
which cannot be provided otherwise, e.g. the pronunciation of specific
words.

I The use of video is demanding on software and hardware, as well as requiring

special programming and design skills. It should be used only when it offers
additional information which cannot be communicated in other ways, and it
should always be provided with an ‘escape’ option.

I When introducing an electronic evaluation form into the program, great care

needs to be exercised over its implementation, because it can disrupt com-
munication seriously and disorientate users. Formative testing can explore
whether introducing it as a game, making it optional or voluntary, offering a
warning, or placing it at the end of the interaction, will have a positive 
effect.
If used, it should always be accompanied by an easy ‘escape’ route, because
users may be intensely irritated by their main exploration being interrupted
by an invitation to evaluate what they have seen.

I It is very effective to program the system so that it records information 
about

individual users’ profiles, their type of navigation and the choices made. Apart
from its usefulness for evaluation, this information can then be used by the
program to present customized information in accordance with that user’s
profile and history of interaction.

Guidelines for Navigation Through Multimedia Programs

I The concept map or index provided should have active links to all the items
listed so that these can be accessed directly. In addition, it is more effective
when it indicates the user’s present position, past moves, and available paths.

I Linear navigation through the program should be supported, as a number of


visitors are likely to prefer it. Designers should always provide a form of 
‘Next’
and ‘Back’ buttons and also consider providing an electronic ‘guided tour’.

I At the same time, they should exploit the power of the medium and provide,

at least in parts, a more flexible, open structure with multiple associative 
links
and alternative ways of navigating for the benefit of more adventurous users
or for those who have already become familiar with the application. A variety
of options and navigation styles should be provided (though without sacrific-
ing ease of use), so as to cater for the diverse audiences of museums and the
wide range of learning styles.

I When hypertext links are provided, they should be very carefully thought

out. Designers should consider providing a warning to users about where the
active link is likely to take them, as they can easily become confused and
disorientated when navigating in this fashion.

Guidelines for Museums Considering Multimedia Production: 1. Before
Becoming Involved with Multimedia

I The Euesperides project made it clear that multimedia design is a laborious,
time-consuming, and demanding task. Even with a low-cost, experimental
application the investment of time and effort was still considerable. In that
particular case, all the design and production work for it was included in a
grant-assisted research project and it was possible to obtain additional spon-
sorship for part of the computer equipment used in the exhibition. In most
cases, however, multimedia production involves considerable costs. When
moving images and video are included these costs can rise dramatically, and
they are factors which museums or relevant bodies need to take into serious
consideration before embarking on any multimedia project.

I Until today the financial success of a cultural CD-ROM has been very rare

(Herszberg, 1997). Naturally, it needs to be taken into consideration that CD-
ROMs can be physically detached and used outside the museum in different
contexts from the multimedia program studied here. Furthermore, this
research study did not deal with the commercial viability of museum multime-
dia products. Museums planning to enter the field of electronic publishing
and multimedia production, should first consider carefully their preliminary
feasibility and marketing studies.

Guidelines for Museums: 2. Collecting the Material

I Museum staff planning to undertake similar experiments should not underesti-
mate the time and effort involved in collecting the material and researching
the content. Several aspects of multimedia production (from programming to
user interface design) can be successfully undertaken outside the museum by
specialists collaborating with the staff, but deciding about the content of the
application and selecting the relevant material requires the experience and
knowledge of curators, collection managers, or other subject specialists. For
this reason, it may be more efficient to select as the subject of the program
an area which has already been well researched and published, with an abun-


dance of good quality material. Plenty of time should be allowed in the plan-
ning for evaluating the available material and for assessing its potential for
communicating messages, aesthetic value, suitability for digitization, edu-
cational impact, and relevance to the national curriculum.

I If considering the inclusion of material drawn from outside the museum or

organization, additional time—together with appropriate financial provision—
needs to be allowed for communications with external institutions or individ-
uals and for negotiating copyright issues. Contributors and rights need to be
acknowledged in the program and the relevant objects, media, or information
must be presented accurately.

I The level of information which the proposed multimedia applications will

provide should be carefully considered. In the case of the Euesperides project,
the majority of visitors were satisfied with a program which included a wealth
of information and covered a broad range of topics. Although in other circum-
stances extended coverage of several topics might not be appropriate, the
use of expensive hardware and software for applications with limited range
and shallow level of information, in general, does not take full advantage of
multimedia’s potential or address a wide spectrum of the public. Interactive
applications often inspire heightened interest and curiosity, which they
should then be able to satisfy.

I Capturing cultural information and its meaning on computers is a very com-

plex process, as the simple acquisition of data—the mass of detailed infor-
mation—does not in itself convey the content. In most cases, the current
utilisation of information technology presents data rather than the information
content, and thus fails to enlighten or teach anything. Museum professionals,
especially curators and collection managers, need to understand what the
users want to see—for what they are asking. We need to overcome our fasci-
nation with the technology and the mass of data which we can process with
computers, and we must not fail to recognise that “the reduction of infor-
mation humans necessarily do without technical help, is not only a loss, but
a deep intellectual process to find out what is relevant, what is worth being
taught, what we should learn” (Doerr, 1996). On the other hand, the free
association of data through a computer screen can potentially assist in a syn-
thesis of cultural puzzles, and the construction of a holistic picture from 
rudi-
mentary fragments of information.

I When preparing the content, it is useful for museum staff to keep in mind
that visitors are very interested in information about people and their lives 
and
are often assisted by the personalization of otherwise bare facts. Additionally,
humour, when used with discretion in a particular application, can be a very
powerful and effective way to communicate ideas.

Guidelines for Museums: 3. During the Design Process

I The design of cultural multimedia is inherently an act of interpretation and
communication. Even when multimedia production is commissioned outside,
the museum staff must be closely involved so as to ensure that the choices
made are those of their institution and that the messages communicated are
those intended.


I There is a danger of multimedia programs being presented as absolute truth
or the only authoritative interpretation. The technology can be used, instead,
in a more powerful and liberating way to make available alternative views,
set out dispassionately fascinating problems, and admit doubt and uncertainty
when it exists.

I The design of multimedia is a very creative process, requiring imagination

and a wide range of skills. Although for practical reasons all production stages
of the Euesperides program had to be carried out by one person, it became
very clear throughout the design process that these programs should ideally
be the product of team work. For the design of successful educational and
interpretative applications a balance needs to be struck between the technical
requirements, the artistic presentation, and the content. It is debatable who
can best meet the requirements asked of this new type of multi-talented pro-
fessional. In my personal opinion, for any successful undertaking in cultural
multimedia, it is necessary for both museum professionals and subject special-
ists to have an understanding of the technology and an ability to reach a
public beyond their peers, and for the computer experts to be enthusiastic
about museums and understand their educational role and special character.

I For many museums the decision to use interactive multimedia involves cre-
ating partnerships with other museums, universities, and cultural organiza-
tions, as well as interacting with the commercial world of production compa-
nies and technology consultants, often in different countries. This tendency
will probably increase in the future, and can prove very useful, but only so
long as humanists and museum staff keep an open mind about the benefits
to be derived from the new technology, together with a dose of healthy scep-
ticism about the exaggerated claims made of it and wariness of the pitfalls
involved. Keeping in touch with new developments, accumulated experi-
ence, constant research, and careful evaluation can help them to make infor-
med decisions.

I A larger body of knowledge needs to be built up before we can generalize

about the characteristics of users of museum computer interactives. The pro-
file of the users of the Euesperides prototype indicated that the common
belief about the attraction of the medium being mainly for young children
and male computer enthusiasts is not always confirmed by real research and
observation, and any decision to incorporate interactive programs in an exhi-
bition does not necessarily exclude a large section of its audience.

I It is important not to design these programs in a gender-specific way. The

Euesperides study showed that female and male visitors were equally likely
to use the computer program. The expansion of the use computers in society
is diminishing any differences in their use and exposure as between the sexes.
Designers of multimedia programs need to be careful that the language, meta-
phors, and icons used are not excluding female users.

Guidelines for Museums: 4. Integrating Multimedia in the Exhibition

I The attraction of interactivity should not be underestimated when preparing
exhibitions, especially when this is implemented at an advanced level, with
a system which encourages user input, offers customized information accord-


ing to the characteristics of different users, and incorporates computer simul-
ation and role-playing metaphors. This human–computer mode of communi-
cation, endowed with the ability for visitors to select from a rich store of
material which particularly interests them, and choose the way it is presented,
is one of the particular features of multimedia which cannot be offered by
more traditional means of museum presentation.

I The use of intuitive and user-friendly interface devices and hardware which

reduce any technophobic predilections of visitors is likely to provide better
communication to the real information content, even if the first few minutes
of interaction have to be devoted to exploring the interface.

I Despite the attraction of the medium, the average time which visitors will

spend with a multimedia program in a public gallery is still likely to be under
10 minutes. In the case of the Euesperides project, it was between 3.7 and

7.7 minutes on average (2.2 to 5.6 minutes median time). Having said that,
it cannot be excluded that a more advanced computer program, or a topic
more attractive and accessible to a wide audience, might significantly increase
the period of interaction.

I Multimedia applications have particular strengths for archaeological 
displays.

Their ability to provide an idea of the original context of the objects on dis-
play, as well as an explanation of archaeological work itself, were particularly
attractive to the public in the exhibition on Euesperides. Visitors greatly
appreciate graphics, photographs and video-clips of where and how the
objects were found; visual information on other archaeological features which
cannot be displayed in the gallery, such as buildings, earth works, and town
plans; information on how these were made and used, e.g. how pottery or
bronze statues were made; reconstructions and models prepared by the exca-
vators, alternative interpretations; and explanations of concepts like 
stratigra-
phy and the grid method. Interactivity can also be used to invite active 
partici-
pation by the users, by placing them, on-screen, in the excavator’s role in a
simulated archaeological trench. Some of these ideas are applicable to other
museum presentation methods as well, but multimedia can combine these
features in a particularly effective way.

I The ability of the system to accommodate group interaction needs to be seri-

ously considered. Museum professionals need to investigate the rapid develop-
ments of the technology in this direction (wall-size displays, ‘slave’ monitors,
hand-held devices, visitor-aware interfaces) and the possibilities for extending
the human–computer communication to include more than one visitor and
thus accommodate the social character of the museum experience.

I Exhibition designers face a particularly demanding task when designing pro-

grams which expect visitors to observe or relate the physical exhibits simul-
taneously with what is displayed on screen. Extensive planning and testing
is necessary for this direct linking to succeed.

I The computer should not be chosen as the sole medium for communicating

messages. There will always be a section of the public, even if it is small,
which is not attracted to computer programs and disapproves of their use in
exhibitions. Exhibition designers should also strive to provide computer-free
spaces for undistracted recollection, contemplation or discussion.


After the Opening of the Exhibition: the Importance of Summative
Evaluation

In any evaluation study the identification of appropriate criteria is vital. 
Although
these always depend on the scope and purpose of the specific study and the
aims of the multimedia program, it is important to combine criteria about:

I the user interface and presentation;

I the structure and navigation;

I the programming;

I the content;

I the integration with exhibition/museum display; and

I overall impressions and effect on visitors.

The experience gained from this project has also been helpful for evaluating
the evaluation tools. Used on their own, none of them would have offered suf-
ficient evidence for understanding the complex experience of the museum visit
and how it is affected by the presence of the computer station. In combination,
however, they illuminated different aspects of a multi-faceted phenomenon. For
any museum evaluation the choice of specific methodological techniques
depends on the questions to be investigated. What can be suggested in general,
however, is that a combination of different methods should be used when evalu-
ating the effectiveness of these programs in cultural and educational settings.
The experience from the Euesperides project has highlighted the importance
of conducting evaluation research of this type in the natural environment, or if
this is not practicable, in a naturalistic environment, closely resembling that 
in
which the application will finally be placed. In-depth evaluation studies of 
cul-
tural multimedia need to take into account the specific character and atmos-
phere of the museum or exhibition under study, as well as the physical, social,
and personal contexts of its visitors, since all these factors affect the way in
which visitors will interact with the computer program (Falk and Dierking,
1992).

Beyond Euesperides: A Wider Perspective of Museum Multimedia

The findings of this study have showed that one type of computer interactive
attracted and engaged visitors in Oxford and enhanced their experience from
the specific archaeological exhibition. Under different conditions, in a 
different
setting, and with different material, multimedia interactives might not have 
been
appropriate or effective. Before making the decision to use multimedia inter-
actives, museums need to consider carefully whether this medium is the one
best suited to the task in hand, taking into account the technical, financial, 
aes-
thetic, and pedagogical implications.

Multimedia applications are just another tool for presenting and interpreting
objects and ideas. Museum professionals need to become familiar with its
strengths and weaknesses, so as to control uncritical enthusiasm as well as 
techn-
ophobic resistance. In any museum presentation, the emphasis has to be on the
message, not the medium. However, the experience from the Euesperides pro-
ject and other findings are showing that the power and attraction of the medium
are very impressive and can in certain circumstances be effective in attracting
visitors to receive the message successfully.


Despite the constant activity and developments of the last decade, the poten-
tial of this technology in the cultural sector has not yet been fully realized, 
and
the emphasis should be directed towards deeper understanding and research.
The leading role needs to be given to the museums and humanities sector, rather
than to computer science which can only play a supporting role in this path
of exploration of how culture is perceived through a computer screen. Closer
collaboration between content specialists, program designers and educators can
play an important role in this direction. Furthermore, systematic testing and
rigorous investigation, as the Euesperides research study has shown, can help
to make interactive multimedia effective interpretation tools which enrich the
experience of museum audiences, both real and ‘virtual’. I hope that the 
findings
and observations generated here will be of general use in the creation of power-
ful and attractive applications that assist the understanding of objects and the
communication of ideas.

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank the staff of the Ashmolean Museum, particularly Michael
Vickers and Jonathan Moffett, and the Museum of Oxford for their support in
this project. My research at the University of Oxford was supported by a 
scholar-
ship from the Lambrakis Research Foundation, Athens.

Bibliography

Allison, D.K. and Gwaltney, T. (1991) How people use electronic interactives: 
information age—
people, information and technology. In Proceedings of the First International 
Conference on
Hypermedia and Interactivity in Museums (ICHIM ’91), ed. D. Bearman, pp. 62–73. 
Archives
and Museum Informatics, Pittsburgh, PA.

Bearman, D. (1995) Hands-on: a snapshot of the evolution of interactive 
multimedia. In Hands on
Hypermedia and Interactivity in Museums, Vol. 2. ICHIM ’95/MCN ’95 (2), ed. D. 
Bearman, pp.
i–ii. (Conference Proceedings). Archives and Museum Informatics, Pittsburgh, 
PA.

Department of Trade and Industry (UK). (1997) Moving into the Information 
Society: an Inter-
national Benchmarking Study. Report commissioned from Spectrum Strategy 
Consultants.

Dierking, L.D. and Falk, J.H. (1998) Audience and accessibility. In The Virtual 
and the Real: Media
in the Museum, eds. S. Thomas and A. Mintz, pp. 57–70. American Association of 
Museums,
Washington, DC.

Doering, Z.D., Pawluklewicz, J.D. and Bohling, K. (1989) The Caribou 
connection: Will People Stop,
Look, and Question? Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.

Doerr, M. (1996) In Forum (ICHIM ’95), Dallas, C. (moderator). Participants: 
Costis Dallas, Martin
Doerr, Maria Economou, Spyros Michailidis, Xavier Perrot, Mitos, 3, 27–34 (in 
Greek).

Economou, M. (1993) Euesperides: a devastated site—a challenge for multimedia 
presentation. Electronic
Antiquity, 1(4), 
ftp://FTP.utas.edu.au/departments/classics/antiquity/1,4–September1993/(04)Artic
les/
Economou, M. (1995) Quest for the golden apples of the Hesperides: Hypermedia 
design for an

archaeological exhibition. In Multimedia Computing and Museums—Selected Papers 
from the
Third International Conference on Hypermedia and Interactivity in Museums 
(ICHIM ’95/MCN
’95), ed. D. Bearman, pp. 248–266. Archives and Museum Informatics, Pittsburgh, 
PA.

Economou, M. (1996) Designing and evaluating a museum multimedia application: 
The Euesperides
project in Oxford. Spectra, 23(4), 18–23.

Economou, M. (1997) The evaluation of a multimedia application for gallery 
interpretation—the
Euesperides Project in Oxford, ICHIM ’97. (Conference Proceedings) Paris, 3–5 
September 1997.
Archives and Museum Informatics, Pittsburgh, PA. pp. 46–54.

Falk, J.H. and Dierking, L.D. (1992) The Museum Experience. Whalesback Books, 
Washington, DC.
Giusti, E. (1994a) Electronic newspaper evaluation. American Museum of Natural 
History, 15 Febru-

ary 1994.


Giusti, E. (1994b) Hall of Human Biology and Evolution: Summative Evaluation. 
American
Museum of Natural History, 3 March 1994.

Herszberg, L. (1997) Le march´e Des Produits Multim´edia, ICHIM’97. pp. 13–17 
(Conference
Proceedings) Paris, 3–5 September 1997. Archives & Museum Informatics, 
Pittsburgh, PA.

Hilke, D.D., Hennings, E. and Springuel, M. (1988) The impact of interactive 
computer software
on visitors’ experiences: a case study. ILVS Review, 1(1), 34–49.

McManus, P. (1993) A survey of visitors’ reactions to the interactive video 
programme “Collectors
in the South Pacific”. In Gallery 33: A Visitor Study, ed. J. Peirson Jones, 
pp. 74–114. Birmingham
Museums and Art Gallery, Birmingham.

McNamara, P. (1986) Computers everywhere—but what happened to the research? The 
Journal of
Museum Education: Roundtable Reports, 11(1), 21–24.

Menninger, M. (1991) An Evaluation Study of the Interactive Videodisc Program 
on Illuminated
Manuscripts. The J. Paul Getty Museum, May 1991.

Raphling, B. (1994) An “ideal” way to evaluate interactive computer programs. 
Current Trends in
Audience Research and Evaluation, 8, 44–48.

Sharpe, E. (1983). Touch-Screen Computers—an Experimental Orientation Device at 
the National
Museum of American History. Office of Public and Academic Programs, National 
Museum of
American History, Smithsonian Institution.

Vickers, M., Gill, D. and Economou, M. (1994) Euesperides: the rescue of an 
excavation. Libyan
Studies, 25, 125–136.

