University of Lapland

This is a self-archived version of an original article. This version usually
differs somewhat from the publisher’s final version, if the self-archived
version is the accepted author manuscript.

Visiting a Virtual Graveyard
Häkkilä, Jonna; Colley, Ashley; Hannula, Petri; Luiro, Elina; Launne, Emilia; Mustonen, Sanni;
Westerlund, Toni
Published in:
MUM '19
DOI:
10.1145/3365610.3368425
Published: 01.01.2019

Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Citation for pulished version (APA):
Häkkilä, J., Colley, A., Hannula, P., Luiro, E., Launne, E., Mustonen, S., & Westerlund, T. (2019). Visiting a
Virtual Graveyard: Designing Virtual Reality Cultural Heritage Experiences. In G. Jacucci , F. Paternò, M. Rohs,
& C. Santoro (Eds.), MUM '19: Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous
Multimedia (pp. 56:1-56:4). ACM . https://doi.org/10.1145/3365610.3368425

Document License
Unspecified

Download date: 10. . 2021

Visiting a Virtual Graveyard - Designing Virtual Reality Cultural
Heritage Experiences
Jonna Häkkilä,1 , Petri Hannula2 , Elina Luiro1 , Emilia Launne1 , Sanni Mustonen2 , Toni Westerlund2
and Ashley Colley1
1

2

University of Lapland, Rovaniemi, Finland. firstname.lastname@ulapland.fi
Lapland University of Applied Sciences, Rovaniemi, Finland. firstname.lastname@lapinamk.fi

Figure 1: Virtual visit to the Salla historical graveyard.

ABSTRACT

KEYWORDS

Virtual reality offers a potential solution to enable visiting inaccessible cultural heritage sites. We present the design, prototyping and
evaluation (n = 6) of a virtual visit to a historic graveyard. The Salla
World War II graveyard is located in an inaccessible border zone between Finland and Russia. Our virtual graveyard, accessed through
a head mounted display, aimed to create an as accurate as possible
simulation of the Salla graveyard, including its atmosphere. Users
are enabled to navigate the virtual graveyard and place a candle
on a grave. Although the simulation was considered immersive,
participants wished for more authenticity and details, e.g. being
able to light the virtual candle. The work opens discussion on the
need for dignity in the design of virtual experiences for sensitive
cultural heritage sites.

Cultural heritage, virtual heritage, graveyard, cemetery, deathscapes, virtual reality, experience design, death, WW2, museum.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction (HCI); User studies; Information visualization; • Applied computing → Arts and humanities.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
MUM 2019, November 26–29, 2019, Pisa, Italy
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7624-2/19/11.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3365610.3368425

ACM Reference Format:
Jonna Häkkilä, Petri Hannula, Elina Luiro, Emilia Launne, Sanni Mustonen,
Toni Westerlund and Ashley Colley. 2019. Visiting a Virtual Graveyard Designing Virtual Reality Cultural Heritage Experiences. In MUM 2019:
18th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia (MUM
2019), November 26–29, 2019, Pisa, Italy. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3365610.3368425

1

INTRODUCTION

The digital age has opened new opportunities for presenting and
accessing historical information and cultural heritage. Virtual reality (VR) has been harnessed as a medium for cultural heritage
content, providing a new and immersive way to present topics to
the audience. One of the general motivations for using VR is to
enable visiting inaccessible locations [10], and many historical sites
are difficult to access, e.g., due their distant location, vulnerability,
or political reasons. Moreover, as Correll has pointed out, there is
also an ethics dimension to be considered in the information visualization [6], which is an important part when designing for a context
fulfilled with human tragedy, as here, the lives that succumbed to
the war.
One example is the graveyard for fallen German soldiers from
the Continuation War (part of WW2), which now lies in the border zone between Finland and Russia. Accessing the graveyard is
difficult due its location, requiring a border zone permit from the
Russian border authorities, the application process for which can

MUM 2019, November 26–29, 2019, Pisa, Italy

Häkkilä et al.

be lengthy. To improve the accessibility of the graveyard, we created a virtual environment that enables the relatives of the buried,
history enthusiasts, and students to visit the graveyard virtually.
We describe our process to design the virtual visitor experience to
the historical graveyard, Figure 1. We present the design process,
implementation, and an initial user study evaluating the experience of virtually visiting the graveyard. Additionally we discuss
our experiences of working with this sensitive design context.

2

RELATED WORK

Prior work relevant to our topic comes from the areas of virtual
reality used in cultural heritage and HCI for deathscapes.

2.1

Figure 2: Examples of existing exhibits at the Salla museum.

Virtual Access to Cultural Heritage

A wide variety of solutions have been presented exploring approaches to enable access to, or to digitally enhance experiences
in, cultural heritage sites. Bekele et al. [3] present a meta-review of
prior works applying Virtual and Augmented reality solutions to
cultural heritage applications. A virtual experience of Han Chang’an
City is presented by Feng et al. [8], which aims to provide personalised guidance and content to visitors. In an implementation of an
outdoor VR environment, with similar environments to our graveyard case, John et al. [13] highlight differences in acceptance based
on the user’s prior experience level with VR systems. Interactive
applications used at the cultural heritage sites itself include e.g. a
multimodal mobile UI for guiding people visiting un-supervised
archaeological sites by McGookin et al. [14], and audio based UI
for experiencing the historical riots in Nottingham, UK [9].

2.2

Designing for Deathscapes

Prior work in the HCI field has addressed digital solutions for graveyards [1, 5, 11, 12]. For example, Ciolfi and Petrelli [5] presented
a digital guide book and Augmented Reality (AR) binoculars to
provide graveyard visitors with more informed experiences. Similarly, the future cemetery project in Bristol, UK, utilized projection
on physical objects within the cemetery to enhance the graveyard
experience [1]. A graveyard navigator, enabling the visitor to navigate to specific graves and to highlight links between graves, was
demonstrated by Häkkilä et al. [12]. Rather being a mirror world
for a physical graveyard, the limited availability of burial sites in
some cities has driven the introduction of ‘virtual only’ burials in
virtual cemeteries [2]. Focusing on creating a tangible recreation of
an inaccessible grave, Häkkilä et al. [11] presented a dynamic gravestone, with different content triggered by inserting RFID equipped
cards.

3

THE SALLA MUSEUM

The Salla museum, located in a small town on Finland’s eastern
border, specialises on the history of the second world war (WW2)
and the reconstruction period following it. Currently, its exhibits
are primarily based on information boards and basic AV media techniques (Figure 2). The museum is located nearby a cultural heritage
site, a WW2 graveyard, located nearby but on the Russian side of
the border. The museum was interested in exploring new ways to
exhibit information on historical sites and particularly to support
visitors wishing to know more about the historical graveyard.

Figure 3: A candle placed in front of a gravestone

The graveyard for fallen German soldiers was founded during
the Continuation War (part of WW2), in 1941 in the former village
of Salla, nowadays called Old Salla. The graveyard is now located
in Russia, within the border zone between Finland and Russia.
Approximately 8000 German soldiers who fell in the battles near
Kantalahti and Kiestinki are buried in the graveyard. In addition,
the remains of soldiers found by search parties in recent years have
also been buried there. The graveyard attracts visitors interested in
history and family heritage. However, accessing the graveyard is
difficult due its location in the border zone, as the access requires a
border zone permit from the Russian border authorities, for which
the application process can be lengthy.
As background research, the design team visited the Salla museum and discussed with museum personnel to gain their insights
for the virtual graveyard concept. Additionally, a local historian
with experience of visiting the Old Salla graveyard, and who had
photographs of the area, was consulted. Due to the visa requirements, the design team have so far been unable to personally visit
the Salla graveyard.

4

VIRTUAL GRAVEYARD PROTOTYPE

The Oculus Rift CV1 was selected as the target head mounted display (HMD) hardware for our prototype. The project was developed
using Unity3D, and 3D-models, based on photographs taken by previous visitors, were created in Blender. To optimise the models, a
high-lowpoly pipeline approach was used. Textures were generated
from a high poly model and then applied to a low poly model.

Visiting a Virtual Graveyard - Designing Virtual Reality Cultural Heritage Experiences
The target of our implementation was to create an as accurate
as possible virtual simulation of the Salla graveyard. We aimed to
recreate the mood of the graveyard, including changing daylight
and weather conditions. As our designers were unable to visit
the area, the implementation was based on photographs taken
by previous visitors to the graveyard. Based on discussions with the
museum staff, a list of potential features for the virtual graveyard
was developed. In the first iteration of the prototype, we selected 3
features to focus on, 1) enabling the user to light and place a candle,
2) volumetric clouds, and, 3) spatial audio. Other suggested features,
such as simulating the evolution of the graveyard over the years,
e.g. trees growing, were interesting, but beyond the scope of our
initial implementation.
The candle-lighting feature enabled the user to pick up a candle, using the handheld VR controllers, light it and leave it at any
location in the scene, for example next to a gravestone, Figure 3.
Although realistic clouds can be created by other approaches, after a short time users easily notice repeating patterns - hence we
selected to implement clouds using volumetic modelling, which
also adds to the mood of the scene. The addition of spatial audio
increases the level of immersion in the VR world, e.g., in the graveyard location during the summer there are many mosquitoes which
the user can hear flying around them. Although the names on the
gravestone were placed as close to correctly as possible, from the
information available, to ensure readability they had to be rendered
in a substitute font, that was close in appearance to the original.

5

Figure 4: Visualisation of the number of fallen soldiers

USER STUDY EVALUATION

To evaluate our prototype virtual visit to the Salla graveyard, we
arranged a user study.

5.1

MUM 2019, November 26–29, 2019, Pisa, Italy

Figure 5: The user study setting

Study Procedure

The study consisted of two parts. After completing a consent form
and background questionnaire, participants were asked to complete
a set of tasks in the virtual graveyard, Figure 5, thinking aloud whilst
they did so. The tasks the participants were asked to complete were:
(T1) Put on the HMD - look around and listen
(T2) Walking navigation
(T3) Navigation by teleportation [4]
(T4) Walking to and investigating a gravestone
(T5) Walking to and investigating the monument
(T6) Placing a candle
(T7) Visualisation of the number of fallen soldiers, Fig. 4
After completing the tasks, participants completed an end questionnaire which also asked for feedback on 6 additional concept
ideas for the virtual graveyard:
(C1) A link from the gravestone to a map showing the location
where the body originally lay
(C2) Showing the virtual graveyard at different times of the day
or seasons of the year
(C3) Placing a wreath or flowers on a grave
(C4) Planting a small tree in the graveyard and watching it grow
remotely from home
(C5) Detailed information on individual soldiers linked to their
grave e.g. photos, personal histories etc.
(C6) Taking photos of the virtual visit.

The virtual graveyard prototype was evaluated with a user study
with six adults (age 21-38, 5 female). Three participants had previously tried a VR headset. Each test session lasted approximately 60
minutes.

5.2

Results

Participants gave generally positive feedback on the immersiveness of the virtual environment (Task T1). However, there were
some wishes for improvements in the sharpness and detail of the
experience especially when viewing objects close up (T4, T5). Two
participants commented on the ‘edge of the world’ experience [15],
e.g., “over there doesn’t not show anything, just a grey background”.
There were mixed feelings about the insect sounds, with some finding it part of the genuine experience, enhancing the immersion
level, whilst others found it annoying, e.g. “it is not a calm feeling
with those insects”. The lack of wind noise was commented by one
participant, noting that the trees were swaying without the sound
of wind.
Considering the navigation, either walking (T2) or teleportation
(T3), the majority of participants preferred teleportation. Walking
was perceived as being too slow, although two participants mentioned that this slow walking added to the overall experience. It was
commented that simply increasing the walking speed would create
a feeling of nausea, due to the ‘head-bob’ movement included in the

MUM 2019, November 26–29, 2019, Pisa, Italy
walking cycle. Teleportation was noted as more challenging and difficult to accurately control, e.g. one participant accidentally moved
to be on top of the grave monument. The general idea of placing a
candle was liked, but the interaction mechanics were problematic.
More authenticity in ‘picking up’ the candle and placing it to the
ground was wished. This interaction was commented as not being
sufficiently dignified for the graveyard context. Similarly it was
stated that the sense of authenticity could be enhanced by enabling
the ability to actually light the candle. The visualization of the total
amount of fallen soldiers (T7) was considered a good addition to
the graveyard environment, however it was commented that more
visual detail in the soldiers would make the experience even more
touching.
As general feedback, participants commented that the VR hand
controllers were too complex, with too many buttons. This created a
need the focus on the technology, which took their attention away
from emotional aspects. It was commented that elderly people
would have some challenges with the visiting the virtual graveyard,
and having some kind of assistant would be helpful. When a tourist
group would visit the virtual graveyard e.g. in the museum, it was
preferred that each would have their own private view of the virtual
graveyard, rather than being able to see other concurrent visitors
in the virtual environment. The six additional concepts (C1 - C6)
presented to the participants raised mixed feeling. On the one hand,
the additional features were seen as needed for visitors who had
no emotional bond to the graveyard. Whilst the other hand, the
graveyard was perceived as a sacred place where nothing extra was
wanted.

6

DISCUSSION

Whilst our study participants were all relatively young adults, such
virtual reality solutions should be accessible to the broad range of
society, including the elderly with little or no training. With this
view many of the findings from our study become amplified in
importance, e.g. the complexity of the VR systems hand-controllers
and the difficulty in controlling teleportation based navigation. Currently VR solutions such as the Oculus Rift used in our evaluation
are primarily driven by the gaming industry, the requirements of
which may be vastly different from those required for the set of
limited interactions in a graveyard environment. Here review of approaches for improving the accessibility of VR, e.g. through the use
of custome controllers, may be of benefit [7]. Similarly, the ‘headbob’ walking animation we adopted from first person shooter (FPS)
games, likely has an overall negative impact on the user experience
in our usage context. Graveyards have traditionally been places that
are often remote and hidden from the world, now digital tools have
opened up new ways to experience them. Yet, graveyards remain a
context where the possible introduction of technologies should be
done with special care and consideration due the sensitivity of the
design context, from the viewpoints of both cultural and individual
experiences.
Potential limitations to our findings arise from our small sample
size and high likelihood of novelty effects in our participant group of
inexperienced head mounted display users. A future work we plan
to explore the use of optimised custom controllers for interaction
in our virtual graveyard.

Häkkilä et al.

7

CONCLUSION

We have presented the design, prototyping and evaluation of a
virtual reality application enabling a virtual visit to the Salla World
War II graveyard, located in an inaccessible border zone between
Finland and Russia. Whilst we aimed to create as realistic as possible
virtual environment, study participants still wished for more detail
and authenticity. Comparison between hand controller button based
walking and teleportation based navigation was inconclusive, with
pros and cons being noted for both approaches. The need for dignity
in such sensitive cultural heritage environments was highlighted,
e.g. a virtual candle should be respectfully placed on a grave, rather
than dropped.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has received funding from the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) for the project Lapland Experience Technologies 2025.

REFERENCES
[1] [n. d.]. Future Cemetery. http://www.react-hub.org.uk/projects/heritage/
future-cemetery/. Accessed: 2019-02-20.
Virtual Reality Cemetery.
http://vrworld.com/2017/11/22/
[2] [n. d.].
first-vr-cemetery-solution-overcrowded-hong-kong/. Accessed: 2019-02-20.
[3] Mafkereseb Kassahun Bekele, Roberto Pierdicca, Emanuele Frontoni, Eva Savina
Malinverni, and James Gain. 2018. A Survey of Augmented, Virtual, and Mixed
Reality for Cultural Heritage. J. Comput. Cult. Herit. 11, 2, Article 7 (March 2018),
36 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3145534
[4] Costas Boletsis and Jarl Erik Cedergren. 2019. VR Locomotion in the New Era of
Virtual Reality: An Empirical Comparison of Prevalent Techniques. Advances in
Human-Computer Interaction 2019 (2019).
[5] Luigina Ciolfi and Daniela Petrelli. 2015. Studying a Community of Volunteers
at a Historic Cemetery to Inspire Interaction Concepts. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Communities and Technologies (C&#38;T ’15). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 139–148. https://doi.org/10.1145/2768545.2768547
[6] Michael Correll. 2019. Ethical dimensions of visualization research. In Proceedings
of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 188.
[7] Matt Dombrowski, Peter A Smith, Albert Manero, and John Sparkman. 2019.
Designing Inclusive Virtual Reality Experiences. In International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 33–43.
[8] Junmei Feng, Xiaoyi Feng, Xiaoxu Liu, and Jinye Peng. 2016. The Virtual Wandering System of Han Chang’an City Based on Information Recommendation. In
Proceedings of the Symposium on VR Culture and Heritage - Volume 2 (VRCAI ’16).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 75–78. https://doi.org/10.1145/3014027.3014028
[9] Elizabeth Fitzgerald, Claire Taylor, and Michael Craven. 2013. To the Castle! A
comparison of two audio guides to enable public discovery of historical events.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 17, 4 (2013), 749–760.
[10] Laura Freina and Michela Ott. 2015. A literature review on immersive virtual
reality in education: state of the art and perspectives. In The International Scientific
Conference eLearning and Software for Education, Vol. 1. " Carol I" National Defence
University, 133.
[11] Jonna Häkkilä, Ashley Colley, and Matilda Kalving. 2019. Designing an Interactive
Gravestone Display. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM International Symposium on
Pervasive Displays (PerDis ’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 4, 7 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3321335.3324952
[12] Jonna Häkkilä, Meri-Tuulia Forsman, and Ashley Colley. 2018. Navigating the
Graveyard: Designing Technology for Deathscapes. In Proceedings of the 17th
International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia. ACM, 199–204.
[13] David John, David Hurst, Paul Cheetham, and Harry Manley. 2018. Visualising
Dudsbury Hillfort: Using Immersive Virtual Reality to Engage the Public with
Cultural Heritage.. In GCH. 193–197.
[14] David McGookin, Yolanda Vazquez-Alvarez, Stephen Brewster, and Joanna
Bergstrom-Lehtovirta. 2012. Shaking the dead: multimodal location based experiences for un-stewarded archaeological sites. In Proceedings of the 7th Nordic
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Making Sense Through Design. ACM,
199–208.
[15] Jarkko Vatjus-Anttila, Leena Ventä-Olkkonen, and Jonna Häkkilä. 2013. On
the edge of a virtual World–investigating usersâĂŹ preferences and different
visualization techniques. In International joint conference on ambient intelligence.
Springer, 198–203.

