IEEE International Workshop on Intelligent Data Acquisition and Advanced 
Computing Systems: Technology and Applications
6-8 September 2007, Dortmund, Germany

Wireless Museum Information Systems

Jürgen Sieck ¹, André Fiedler ²

University of Applied Sciences FHTW Berlin

1) j.sieck@fhtw-berlin.de, http://inka.f4.fhtw-berlin.de/sieck

2) andre.fiedler@fhtw-berlin.de, http://inka.f4.fhtw-berlin.de/fiedler


Abstract – This article describes several technical aspects of
three different museum information systems developed at the
author’s university. It examines key features of the systems,
shows multiple ways of mobile content access and outlines future
research potentials.

Keywords - wireless information systems, mobile devices, IT-
infrastructure in museums

I. INTRODUCTION

The development of mobile devices in the last 25 years
has continually affected the creation of new mobile
applications based on emergent technologies. While newly
developed  device  types  with  different  technical
specifications have surrounded us in our everyday life and
private environment, new base technologies have also
been established step-by-step.

Industrial standards and paradigms tremendously affect
inventions  and  developments  in  the  mobile  sector
nowadays starting in the field of ergonomic hardware
design for the mobile market and ending with common
patterns for highly effective software engineering.

By  combining  the  advantages  of  established
technologies with these new approaches and furthermore
adapting those criteria to the different user needs and
application scenarios we are able to extend existing
applications with new mobile components and services.
Furthermore highly innovative concepts can be realised
and integrated in a given environment.

II. IMPACT OF MOBILE DEVICES ON WIRELESS
INFORMATION SYSTEMS

By looking more closely at the development of
common network technologies in the consumer market
those effects can be examined regarding the acceptance of
miniaturised mobile devices. After starting with the idea
of using mobile devices mainly for managing contacts we
use those network enabled multimedia gadgets today for
much more. The capability of permanent communication,
almost independent from the user’s current time and
location, lets people create scenarios not only for
transmitting speech but also increasingly more pure data.

With regard to these and further features, there are
currently a plethora of devices on the world market such
as personal digital assistants, smartphones and UMTS
mobile phones, going further to internet tablets or mobile

navigation systems and finally video-enabled MP3 players
with lifestyle character. Even though most of them show
differences concerning their technical aspects, engineering
departments however are increasingly asked to develop
mobile applications that cover all existing device types.

Particularly those services and systems that are created
for the usage in a mobile environment by integrating new
technologies must offer a significant additional value to
the  user’s life to be generally accepted and resold. At this
point meeting the users expectations and demands is as
important as constantly offering new features and services
with easy-to-use interfaces.

Since using the term of “third generation mobile
technology”  for  addressing  the  universal  mobile
telecommunication system (UMTS) both the name and the
demand  for  location-based  services  have  arisen.
Applications and systems, which follow these demands
and concepts, begin to take the user’s mobility and her
device into consideration, in order to evaluate and
integrate the permanently changing parameters as well as
the aspects of a restricted runtime environment into the
application itself. As a result information is distributed in
a memory- and bandwidth efficient way, depending on the
users location and her environment. Using this technology
not only makes it possible to offer basic information in a
wide field of topics but it also uses information in a more
detailed way which brings the additional value to the user.
Instead of always giving access to the entire application
the system generates single views with highly specialised
content.

With regard to this range of functions a second aspect
becomes increasingly important to the development of
new mobile applications. For a vast array of different
devices with an equally large range of different
parameters not only does location dependent information
play  a significant role but also the reuse and adoption of a
constantly growing and updated central database. For that
reason it is not the goal for software developers to create
several highly customised services for single platforms but
to generate and distribute an optimized version of an
application with respect to the device of interest.

In the following subsections three applications are
presented which were jointly developed at the University
of  Applied  Sciences  FHTW  Berlin  as  part  of

1-4244-1348-6/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE         669


interdisciplinary projects by the departments of Applied
Computer Sciences and Museum Sciences (q.v. [1]). In
the project results the mechanisms of both the location-
based information presentation and the multiple content
transformation are discussed.

III. A MULTIMEDIA TOURIST INFORMATION SYSTEM
FOR THE GREEK PENINSULA PELOPONNES (THE

DIMO PROJECT)

In contrast to common applications in the field of
museum guides this project does not contain information
and media assets for a spatially restricted exhibition area.
It rather follows the concept of treating a whole
geographical region as an open-air museum where the
surrounding landscape is more or less the new museum’s
walls. With many detailed, widely-researched subsections
the system offers a convenient way for visitors to receive
information or look just around. For this purpose all
historical, archaeological, geographical and cultural data
were collected and listed into a content management
system. This enables a better management and final
presentation  through  a  database  integrating  internet
platform for different user devices (Fig. 1 and 2) (q.v. [2]).
Experts as well as generally interested users can access
this information collection not only through their private
desktop computer but also via a specially customized
flexible view on the system, optimised for the device they
use. This means, that besides notebook computers also
personal  digital  assistants  and  mobile  phones  are
supported as well as other mobile devices. Additionally
users can also use the system to dynamically produce a

printable format like PDF.

For presenting the multimedia content assets the
application offers access to a multitude of images, videos
and 360° panorama scenes. Even the usage of these assets
undergoes a special treatment for only distributing media
sections in an optimised form and thus keeping the
additional value for the user through multiple channels.

Fig. 1. Data handling and presentation in the DIMO project.

Fig. 2. Automatic content adaptation on mobile clients.

The system described is based on the Cocoon
Framework (as described in [3]) of the Apache Software
Foundation in combination with some major XML
language dialects (XSL-FO, XSLT, XPath, XSP). This
enables the application to keep the most flexible
mechanisms for customising and extending, even in a
sophisticated scenario with multiple new mobile device
types. XML serves as a data format that is independent of
any used media asset and therefore offers a convenient
way of storing and processing any kind of data.
Particularly the constantly growing database and direct
accessibility for users, allow the advantages of an adaptive
data transformation and presentation become increasingly
important.

The continuing project is focused on integrating
location-based services for marketing a complete mobile
museum’s guide application for personal digital assistants.
In  this situation the user and his position is constantly
being tracked in a well-defined environment. After
comparing this with data sets of known objects or places
we  can obtain a prediction of whether the user is in the
close environment of a predefined object or place. In case
of a positive match the system will present information
and data in a proactive way, addressing exactly the current
object. This feature obtains a highly important meaning
especially in the field of archaeology or tourist
information systems. Imagine a system, which can
automatically display background information about an
almost completely destroyed temple combined with some
animated 3D-predictions about its previous appearance.
With the detailed scenario the user can get an additional
value as well as experiencing long gone cultures in a very
present environment.

670


IV. LOCALISATION IN THE CONTEXT OF A MOBILE

INFORMATION SYSTEM

The common idea of location-based information
distribution was considered and researched more
intensively in a project, dealing with the conception and
development of a museum guide for the Berlin Pergamon
Museum (q.v. [4]). In contrast to a potential scenario,
where the Global Positioning System might be used to
track the user’s position in a widely-spread area and
present location-dependent information about a certain
object, this concept cannot be applied to an indoor
scenario with short distances due to its variation range.

The amount and size of objects, together with their
mass of information, demanded new concepts when
developing a mobile information application in this case.
For storing and managing data at a central location, a
database was established. Access to this base by a mobile
device, e.g. a PDA, was given through a wireless local
area network. Among several other criteria, such as
calling up desired information about a particular object in
a manual manner by navigating a media-enriched flash
menu structure, the main goal was to automatically
present relevant information as soon as the user explicitly
moves towards a certain object, e.g. the world-famous
Pergamon Altar (Fig. 3).

For guaranteeing this range of functions, the system
distributes information depending on the device’s relative
position to several previously registered points of the
exhibition. To be able to clearly localise a user within an
indoor-context, the system accesses the wireless local area
network and its protocols, which are already used for
communication purposes. Tracking the user’s position
exactly   is based on the idea that every exhibition room
offers an array of new information worth presenting to the
user. As soon as a user and their device change position,
which is equal to leaving one access point coverage and
entering another, the base of relevant information changes
coincidentally. This handover occurs without the loss of
network connectivity. By adopting this approach to the
described use case at the Pergamon Museum, a network
consisting of several access points, servers, mobile clients
and alike is established, as illustrated in Fig. 4.

Fig. 3. Location-based content presentation on a mobile device.

Fig. 4. Network composition of the Pergamon Museum project’s
mobile information system.

V. USING NEW WAYS OF DISTRIBUTING CONTENT IN

MOBILE INFORMATION SYSTEMS

The complexity and method of presenting multimedia
content on a mobile device in a museum information
system scenario is strongly dependent on the basic
parameters of the museum’s concept itself, as described
above. In contrast to the formerly described scenarios, the
appearance, conception and image of the Berlin Museum
of Modern Art (Berlinische Galerie) is completely
different. Instead of realising a permanent and fixed
object’s placement, every exhibit presented undergoes a
frequent change in arrangement and composition amongst
others. For developing a mobile information system
meeting this Museum’s demands, the conceptual model
needed to take two facts into consideration: firstly, the
management of the vast amount of information regarding
a constantly growing exhibit base with only an extract to
be presented; secondly, the possibility to frequently
rearrange objects depending on a certain topic.

By using a network-based platform, which guides users
according to previously created topic-specific tours, only
fractions of any voluminous database needs to be
displayed. At the same time, a location-based distribution
of  data according to one’s relative position to a fixed
network component, like WLAN access points, can be
omitted. Complex tours are offered to the user, which can
be chosen manually and cover several exhibition topics.
Through this method, a wide range of bonus material can
be presented to a consumer, only considering the objects
of the currently chosen tour. However, this form of
inflexible guidance may prevent a user from fully
appreciating the exhibition scenery. Therefore, users are
able   to start, stop and continue a tour at any point of
interest

As the runtime environment and principal platform for
mobile usage, PDAs were addressed since these devices
currently offer multiple methods of network connections,
as well as the best compromise regarding display quality,
media content support and physical appearance, as
Marjorie Schwarzer already predicted in [5]. Through
addressing these devices, the chance of usage barriers

671


appearing is minimised due to interaction similarities
compared to desktop personal computers. Complex
museum contents can be visualised and explained in place
by offering multiple multimedia-enriched contents, which
reminds a user of commonly experienced human-guided
museum tours. Going further, this experience is not only
restricted to the Museum’s visit itself. For preparing a
visit, as well as for subsequent research, the system
(illustrated in Fig. 5) gives access to two key features.

On the one hand, there is a way of subscribing to a list
of updated tour contents from a personal computer. By
utilising the RSS (Really Simple Syndication) technology,
tour contents are offered as freely podcasts with the
capability to manually control the replay of combined
image and audio data. The additional value – besides the
mobile usage of museum contents – can be seen in an
extremely data-reduced way of distributing a combination
of image and audio assets, which can be user-controlled.
After synchronising an iPod with a personal computer of
choice, the transferred contents can be brought into the
Museum environment on a private mobile device, and
finally be consumed in a similar way to PDAs. Here, an
array of additional aspects positively influences the
experience for users, especially concerning the degree of
freedom and flexibility: the novel interaction concept
integrated in iPods as well as larger resources in the fields
of storage and battery operating time.

On the other hand, a secondly created additional value
for users can be experienced while visiting the exhibition.
There, a user can generate their personal exhibition
catalogue on the fly and gradually add objects of interest
to  it while visiting the museum. At the end, an email is
sent to the user’s address of choice, containing the
generated catalogue attached in a printable format.

For collecting both the user’s contact datasets and
composing and managing the different exhibits, a custom
Content Management System (as illustrated in figure 5)
was developed. This application holds the information
base, integrates media assets and provides the opportunity
to generate new tours or manage existing ones according
to specified parameters.

VI. RESULTS

Several features of what has already been outlined in

[5] were developed and tested separately in the projects
described above. Nevertheless, there is only little
approach regarding a potential permanent use of a highly
sophisticated mobile information system combining these
results with the dynamic context and location based data
selection and presentation in a multimodal way.

Therefore, the new project EMIKA, as described in [6],
was established in a co-operation between the Berlin
Jewish Museum Berlin and the University of Applied
Sciences FHTW Berlin. Here, the main focus is to design
mobile  multimedia indoor and outdoor information
systems with regard to all descibed features.

REFERENCES

[1] Research group “Information and Communication Systems,”
University  of  Applied  Sciences  FHTW  Berlin.
http://inka.f4.fhtw-berlin.de

[2] C. Hoepfner, J. Sieck, P. Weyrich, “Informationstechnische
Grundlagen fuer das mobile Informationssystem Dimo Enkyklo-
pedia, (The IT-infrastructure of the mobile information system
Dimo Enkyklopedia),” Proceedings of the Conf. Electronic
Imaging and the Visual Arts (EVA), SPK Berlin, 2005, pp. 180-
187.

[3] S. Niedermeyer, Cocoon 2 und Tomcat. Galileo Computing, 2005.

[4] M. Hybsier, A. Lang, J. Sieck, K. Sommer, C. Friedrich, “Entwurf
und Implementierung multimodaler Museumsinformationssysteme
am Beispiel eines Prototypen fuer die Berlinische Galerie, (Design
and implementation of multimodal museum information systems in
a prototype approach for the Berlin Museum of Modern Art),”
Proceedings of the Conf. Electronic Imaging and the Visual Arts
(EVA), SPK Berlin, 2006, pp. 89-93.

[5] M. Schwarzer, Art & Gadgetry - The Future of the Museum Visit,
published in Museum News, The American Association of
Museums, 2001.

[6]  J. Mohnke, J. Sieck, “History, philosophy, and computer science –
How to bring them together to develop an outstanding eLearning
tool for a museum,” Proceedings of the 2007 UICEE 11ᵗʰ Baltic
Region Seminar on Engineering Education, Tallinn, Estonia, 18-20
June 2007 (to be published).

[7] J. Schiller, Mobilkommunikation (Mobile Communication),
Addison-Wesley, 2003.

Fig. 5. System architecture for the Berlin Museum of Modern
Art project.

672

